SANSKRIT GRAMMAR
Including both the Classical Language, and
the older Dialects, of Veda and Brahmana
BY
WILLIAM DWIGHT WHITNEY
Late Professor of Sanskrit in Yale University, Knight of the Prussian Order
Pour le Mérite, Corresponding Member of the Académie des Inscrip-
tions et Belles-Lettres of the Institute of France, etc., Editor-
in-Chief of The Century Dictionary, an Encyclopedic
Lexicon of the English Language
CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS
HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON: GEOFFREY CUMBERLEGE
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
1950

SEVENTH ISSUE (1950) OF THE SECOND EDITION (1889)

PREFACE
to the First Edition.
It was in June, 1875, as I chanced to be for a day or two in Leipzig, that I was
unexpectedly invited to prepare the Sanskrit grammar for the Indo-European series projected
by Messrs. Breitkopf and Härtel. After some consideration, and consultation with friends, I
accepted the task, and have since devoted to it what time could be spared from regular duties,
after the satisfaction of engagements earlier formed. If the delay seems a long one, it was
nevertheless unavoidable; and I would gladly, in the interest of the work itself, have made it
still longer. In every such case, it is necessary to make a compromise between measurably
satisfying a present pressing need, and doing the subject fuller justice at the cost of more time;
and it seemed as if the call for a Sanskrit grammar on a somewhat different plan from those
already in use — excellent as some of these in many respects are — was urgent enough to
recommend a speedy completion of the work begun.
The objects had especially in view of the preparation of this grammar have been the
following:
1. To make a presentation of the facts of the language primarily as they show themselves in
use in the literature, and only secondarily as they are laid down by the native grammarians.
The earliest European grammars were by the necessity of the case chiefly founded on their
native prede-

cessors; and a traditional method was thus established which has been perhaps somewhat too
closely adhered to, at the expense of clearness and of proportion, as well as of scientific truth.
Accordingly, my attention has not been directed toward a profounder study of the grammatical
science of the Hindu schools: their teachings I have been contented to take as already reported
to Western learners in the existing Western grammars.
2. To include also in the presentation the forms and constructions of the older language, as
exhibited in the Veda and the Brāhmaṇa. Grassmann’s excellent Index-Vocabulary to the Rig-
Veda, and my own manuscript one to the Atharva-Veda (which I hope soon to be able to make
public[1]), gave me in full detail the great mass of Vedic material; and this, with some
assistance from pupils and friends, I have sought to complete, as far as the circumstances
permitted, from the other Vedic texts and from the various works of the Brāhmana period, both
printed and manuscript.
3. To treat the language throughout as an accented one, omitting nothing of what is known
respecting the nature of the Sanskrit accent, its changes in combination and inflection, and the
tone of individual words — being, in all this, necessarily dependent especially upon the material
presented by the older accentuated texts.
4. To cast all statements, classifications, and so on, into a form consistent with the
teachings of linguistic science. In doing this, it has been necessary to discard a few of the long-
used and familiar divisions and terms of Sanskrit grammar — for example, the classification
and nomenclature of „special tenses” and “general tenses” (which is so indefensible that one
can only wonder at its having maintained itself so long), the order and terminology of the
conjugation-classes, the separation in treatment of the facts of internal and ex-
1. ↑ It was published, as vol. XII. of the Journal of the American Oriental Society, in 1861.

ternal euphonic combination, and the like. But care has been taken to facilitate the transition
from the old to the new; and the changes, it is believed, will commend themselves to
unqualified acceptance. It has been sought also to help an appreciation of the character of the
language by putting its facts as far as possible into a statistical form. In this respect the native
grammar is especially deficient and misleading.
Regard has been constantly had to the practical needs of the learner of the language, and it
has been attempted, by due arrangement and by the use of different sizes of type, to make the
work as usable by one whose object it is to acquire a knowledge of the classical Sanskrit alone
as those are in which the earlier forms are not included. The custom of transliterating all
Sanskrit words into European characters, which has become usual in European Sanskrit
grammars, is, as a matter of course, retained throughout; and, because of the difficulty of
setting even a small Sanskrit type with anything but a large European, it is practiced alone in
the smaller sizes.
While the treatment of the facts of the language has thus been made a historical one, within
the limits of the language itself, I have not ventured to make it comparative, by bringing in the
analogous forms and processes of other related languages. To do this, in addition to all that
was attempted beside, would have extended the work, both in content and in time of
preparation, far beyond the limits assigned to it. And, having decided to leave out this element,
I have done so consistently throughout. Explanations of the origin of forms have been avoided,
for the same reason and for others, which hardly call for statement.
A grammar is necessarily in great part founded on its predecessors, and it would be vain to
attempt an acknowledgement in detail of all the aid received from other scholars. I have had at
hand always especially the very scholarly and reliable brief summary of Kielhorn, the full and

excellent work of Monier Williams, the smaller grammar of Bopp (a wonder of learning and
method for the time when it was prepared), and the volumes of Benfey and Müller. As regards
to the material of the language, no other aid, of course, has been at all comparable with the
great Petersburg lexicon of Böhtlingk and Roth, the existence of which gives by itself a new
character to all investigations of the Sanskrit language. What I have not found there or in the
special collections made by myself or by others for me, I have called below “not quotable” — a
provisional designation , necessarily liable to correction in detail by the results of further
researches. For what concerns the verb, its forms and of their classification and uses, I have
had, as every one must have, by far the most aid from Delbrück, in his Altindisches Verbum
and his various syntactical contributions. Former pupils of my own, Professors Avery and
Edgren, have also helped me, in connection with this subject and with others, in a way and
measure that calls for public acknowledgment. In respect to the important matter of the
declension in the earliest language, I have made great use of the elaborate paper in the Journ.
Am. Or. Soc. (printed contemporaneously with this work, and used by me almost, but not quite,
to the end of the subject) by my former pupil Prof. Lanman; my treatment of it is founded on
his. My manifold obligations to my own teacher, Prof. Weber of Berlin, also require to be
mentioned: among other things, I owe to him the use of his copies of certain unpublished texts
of the Brāhmana period, not otherwise accessible to me; and he was kind enough to look
through with me my work in its inchoate condition, favoring me with valuable suggestions. For
this last favor I have likewise to thank Prof. Delbrück — who, moreover, has taken the trouble
to glance over for a like purpose the greater part of the proof-sheets of the grammar, as they
came from the press. To Dr. L. von Schröder is due whatever use I have been

able to make (unfortunately a very imperfect one) of the important Māitrāyaṇī-Sanhitā.[1]
Of the deficiencies of my work I am, I think, not less fully aware than any critic of it, even
the severest, is likely to be. Should it be found to answer its intended purpose well enough to
come to another edition, my endeavor will be to improve and complete it; and I shall be
grateful for any corrections or suggestions which may aid me in making it a more efficient help
to the study of the Sanskrit language and literature.
Gotha, July 1879.
W.D.W.
PREFACE
to the Second Edition.
In preparing a new edition of this grammar, I have made use of the new material gathered
by myself during the intervening years,[2] and also of that gathered by others, so far as it was
accessible to me and fitted into my plan;[3] and I have had the benefit of kind suggestions
from various quarters — for all of which I desire to return a grateful acknowledgment. By such
help, I have been able not only to correct and repair certain errors in omissions of the first
edition, but also to speak with more definiteness upon
1. ↑ Since published in full by him, 1881–6.
2. ↑ A part of this new material was published by myself in 1885, as a Supplement to the
grammar, under the title “Roots, Verb-Forms, and Primary Derivatives of the Sanskrit
Language”.
3. ↑ Especially deserving of mention is Holtzmann’s collection of material from the
Mahābhārata, also published (1884) in the form of a Supplement to this work; also
Böhtlingk’s similar collection from the larger half of the Rāmāyaṇa.

very many points relating to the material and usages of the language.
In order not to impair the applicability of the references already made to the work by
various authors, its paragraphing has been retained unchanged throughout; for increased
convenience of further reference, the subdivisions of paragraphs have been more thoroughly
marked, by letters (now and then changing a former lettering); and the paragraph-numbers
have been set at the outer instead of the inner edge of the upper margin.
My remoteness from the place of publication has forbidden me the reading of more than
one proof; but the kindness of Professor Lanman in adding his revision (accompanied by other
timely suggestions) to mine, and the care of the printers, will be found, I trust, to have aided
in securing a text disfigured by few errors of the press.
Circumstances beyond my control have delayed for a year or two the completion of this
revision, and have made it in some parts less complete than I should have desired.
New-Haven, Sept. 1888.
W.D.W.

INTRODUCTION.
Brief Account of the Indian Literature.
It seems desirable to give here such a sketch of the history of Indian literature as shall
show the relation to one another of the different periods and forms of the language treated in
the following grammar, and the position of the works there quoted.
The name “Sanskrit” (saṁskṛta, 1087 d, adorned, elaborated, perfected), which is popularly
applied to the whole ancient and sacred language of India, belongs more properly only to that
dialect which, regulated and established by the labors of the native grammarians, has led for
the last two thousand years or more an artificial life, like that of Latin during most of the same
period in Europe, as the written and spoken means of communication of the learned and
priestly caste; and which even at the present day fills that office. It is thus distinguished, on
the one hand, from the later and derived dialects — as the Prākrit, forms of language which
have datable monuments from as early as the third century before Christ, and which are
represented by inscriptions and coins, by the speech of the uneducated characters in the
Sanskrit dramas (see below), and by a limited literature; the Pāli, a Prakritic dialect which
became the sacred language of Buddhism in Farther India, and is

still in service there as such; and yet later and more altered tongues forming the transition to
the languages of modern India. And, on the other hand, it is distinguished, but very much less
sharply and widely, from the older dialects or forms of speech presented in the canonical
literature, the Veda and Brāhmaṇa.
This fact, of the fixation by learned treatment of an authorized mode of expression, which
should thenceforth be used according to rule in the intercourse of the educated, is the cardinal
one in Indian linguistic history; and as the native grammatical literature has determined the
form of the language, so it has also to a large extent determined the grammatical treatment of
the language by European scholars.
Much in the history of the learned movement is still obscure, and opinions are at variance
even as to points of prime consequence. Only the concluding works in the development of the
grammatical science has been preserved to us; and though they are evidently the perfected
fruits of a long series of learned labors, the records of the latter are lost beyond recovery. The
time and the place of the creation of Sanskrit are unknown; and as to its occasion, we have
only our inferences and conjectures to rely upon. It seems, however, altogether likely that the
grammatical sense of the ancient Hindus was awakened in great measure by their study of the
traditional sacred texts, and by their comparison of its different language with that of
contemporary use. It is certain that the grammatical study of those texts (çākhās, lit’ly
branches), phonetic and other, was zealously and effectively followed in the Brahmanic schools;
this is attested by our possession of a number of phonetico-grammatical treatises, prātiçākhyas
(prati çākhām belonging to each several text ), each having for subject one principal Vedic text,
and noting all its peculiarities of form; these, both by the depth and exactness of their own
researches and by the number of authorities which they quote, speak plainly of a lively
scientific activity continued during a long time. What part, on the other hand, the notice of
differ-

ences between the correct speech of the learned and the altered dialects of the vulgar may
have borne in the same movement is not easy to determine; but it is not customary that a
language has its proper usages fixed by rule until the danger is distinctly felt of its undergoing
corruption.
The labors of the general school of Sanskrit grammar reached a climax in the grammarian
Pāṇini, whose text-book, containing the facts of the language cast into the highly artful and
difficult form of about four thousand algebraic-formula-like rules (in the statement and
arrangement of which brevity alone is had in view, at the cost of distinctness and
unambiguousness), became for all after time the authoritative, almost sacred, norm of correct
speech. Respecting his period, nothing really definite and trustworthy is known; but he is with
much probability held to have lived some time (two to four centuries) before the Christian era.
He has had commentators in abundance, and has undergone at their hands some measure of
amendment and completion; but he has not been overthrown or superseded. The chief and most
authoritative commentary on his work is that called the Mahābhāshya great comment, by
Patanjali.
A language, even if not a vernacular one, which is in tolerably wide and constant use for
writing and speaking, is, of course, kept in life principally by direct tradition, by communication
from teacher to scholar and the study and imitation of existing texts, and not by the learning of
grammatical rules; yet the existence of grammatical authority, and especially of a single one,
deemed infallible and of prescriptive value, could not fail to exert a strong regulative influence,
leading to the avoidance of more and more of what was, even if lingering in use, inconsistent
with his teachings, and also, in the constant reproduction of texts, to the gradual effacement of
whatever they might contain that was unapproved. Thus the whole more modern literature of
India has been Paninized, so to speak, pressed into the mould prepared by him and his school.
What are the limits of the artificiality of this process is not yet known.

The attention of special students of the Hindu grammar (and the subject is so intricate and
difficult that the number is exceedingly small of those who have mastered it sufficiently to have
a competent opinion on such general matters) has been hitherto mainly directed toward
determining what the Sanskrit according to Pāṇini really is, toward explaining the language
from the grammar. And, naturally enough, in India, or wherever else the leading object is to
learn to speak and write the language correctly — that is, as authorized by the grammarians —
that is the proper course to pursue. This, however, is not the way really to understand the
language. The time must soon come, or it has come already, when the endeavor shall be
instead to explain the grammar from the language: to test in all details, so far as shall be found
possible, the reason of Pāṇini’s rules (which contain not a little that seems problematic, or even
sometimes perverse); to determine what and how much genuine usage he had everywhere as
foundation, and what traces may be left in the literature of usages possessing an inherently
authorized character, though unratified by him.
By the term “classical” or “later” language, then, as constantly used below in the grammar,
is meant the language of those literary monuments which are written in conformity with the
rules of the native grammar: virtually, the whole proper Sanskrit literature. For although parts
of this are doubtless earlier than Pāṇini, it is impossible to tell just what parts, or how far they
have escaped in their style the leveling influence of the grammar. The whole, too, may be
called so far an artificial literature as it is written in a phonetic form (see grammar, 101 a)
which never can have been a truly vernacular and living one. Nearly all of it is metrical: not
poetic works only, but narratives, histories (so far as anything deserving that name can be said
to exist), and scientific treatises of every variety, are done into verse; a prose and prose
literature hardly has an existence (the principle exceptions, aside from the voluminous
commentaries, are a few stories, as the Daçakumāracarita and the Vāsavadattā). Of linguistic
history there is next to nothing

in it all; but only a history of style, and this for the most part showing a gradual depravation,
and increase of artificiality and an intensification of certain more undesirable features of the
language — such as the use of passive constructions and of participles instead of verbs, and the
substitution of compounds for sentences.
This being the condition of the later literature, it is of so much the higher consequence that
there is an earlier literature, to which the suspicion of artificiality does not attach, or attaches
at least only in a minimal degree, which has a truly vernacular character, and abounds in prose
as well as verse.
The results of the very earliest literary productiveness of the Indian people are the hymns
with which, when they had only crossed the threshold of the country, and when their
geographic horizon was still limited to the river-basin of the Indus with its tributaries, they
praised their gods, the deified powers of nature, and accompanied the rites of their
comparatively simple worship. At what period these were made and sung cannot be determined
with any approach to accuracy: it may have been as early as 2000 B.C. They were long handed
down by oral tradition, preserved by the care, and increased by the additions and imitations, of
succeeding generations; the mass was ever growing, and, with the change of habits and beliefs
and religious practices, was being variously applied — sung in chosen extracts, mixed with
other material into liturgies, adapted with more or less of distortion to help the needs of a
ceremonial which was coming to be of immense elaboration and intricacy. And, at some time in
the course of this history, there was made for preservation a great collection of the hymn-
material, mainly its oldest and most genuine part, to the extent of over a thousand hymns and
ten thousand verses, arranged according to traditional authorship and to subject and length
and metre of hymn: this collection is the Rig-Veda Veda of verses (ṛc) or of hymns. Other
collections were made also out of the same general mass of traditional material: doubtless later,
although the inter-

relations of this period are as yet too unclear to allow of our speaking with entire confidence as
to anything concerning them. Thus, the Sāma-Veda Veda of chants (sāman), containing only
about a sixth as much, its verses nearly all found in the Rig-Veda also, but appearing here with
numerous differences of reading: these were passages put together for chanting at the soma-
sacrifices. Again, collections called by the comprehensive name of Yajur-Veda Veda of sacrificial
formulas (yajus): these contained not verses alone, but also numerous prose utterances, mingled
with the former, in the order in which they are practically employed in the ceremonies; they
were strictly liturgical collections. Of these, there are in existence several texts, which have
their mutual differences: the Vājasaneyi-Saṁhitā (in two slightly discordant versions,
Mādhyandina and Kāṇva), sometimes also called the White Yajur-Veda; and the various and
considerably differing texts of the Black Yajur-Veda, namely the Tāittirīya-Saṁhitā, the
Māitrāyaṇī-Saṁhitā, the Kapiṣṭhala-Saṁhitā, and the Kāṭhaka (the two last not yet published).
Finally, another historical collection, like the Rig-Veda, but made up mainly of later and less
accepted material, and called (among other less current names) the Atharva-Veda Veda of the
Atharvans (a legendary priestly family); it is somewhat more than half as bulky as the Rig-Veda,
and contains a certain amount of material corresponding to that of the latter, and also a
number of very brief prose passages. To this last collection is very generally refused in the
orthodox literature the name of Veda; but for us it is the most interesting of all, after the Rig-
Veda, because it contains the largest amount of hymn-material (or mantra, as it it is called, in
distinction from the prose brāmaṇa), and in a language which, though distinctly less antique
than that of the other, is nevertheless truly Vedic. Two versions of it are extant, one of them in
only a single known manuscript.
A not insignificant body of like material, and of various period (although doubtless in the
main belonging to the latest time of the Vedic productiveness, and in part perhaps

the imitative work of a yet more modern time), is scattered through the texts to be later
described, the Brāmaṇas and the Sūtras. To assemble and sift and compare it is now one of the
pressing needs of Vedic study.
The fundamental divisions of the Vedic literature here mentioned have all had their various
schools of sectaries, each of these with a text of its own, showing some differences from those
of the other schools: but those mentioned above are all that are now known to be in existence;
and the chance of the discovery of others grows every year smaller.
The labor of the schools in the conservation of their sacred texts was extraordinary, and has
been crowned with such success that the text of each school, whatever may be its differences
from the other schools, is virtually without various readings, preserved with all its peculiarities
of dialect, and its smallest and most exceptional traits of phonetic form, pure and unobscured.
It is not the place here to describe the means by which, in addition to the religious care of the
sectaries, this accuracy was secured: forms of text, lists of peculiarities and treatises upon
them, and so on. When this kind of care began in the case of each text, and what of original
character may have been effaced before it, or lost in spite of it, cannot be told. But it is certain
that the Vedic records furnish, on the whole, a wonderfully accurate and trustworthy picture of
a form of ancient Indian language (as well as ancient Indian beliefs and institutions) which was
a natural and undisturbed one, and which goes back a good way behind the classical Sanskrit.
Its differences from the latter the following treatise endeavors to show in detail.
Along with the verses and sacrificial formulas and phrases in the text of the Black Yajur-
Veda are given long prose sections, in which the ceremonies are described, their meaning and
the reason of the details and the accompanying utterances are discussed and explained,
illustrative legends are reported or fabricated, and various speculations, etymological and other,
are indulged in. Such matter comes

to be called brāmaṇa (apparently relating to the brahman or worship). In the White Yajur-Veda,
it is separated into a work by itself, beside the saṁhitā or text of verse and formulas, and is
called the Çatapatha-Brāmaṇa Brāhmana of a hundred ways . Other similar collections are found,
belonging to various other schools of Vedic study, and they bear the common name of
Brāhmaṇa, with the name of the school, or some other distinctive title, prefixed. Thus, the
Āitareya and Kāuṣītaki-Brāhmaṇas, belonging to the schools of the Rig-Veda, the Pañcaviṅça and
Ṣaḍviṅça-Brāhmaṇas and other minor works, to the Sāma-Veda; the Gopatha-Brāhmaṇa, to the
Atharva-Veda; and a Jāiminīya- or Talavakāra-Brāhmaṇa, to the Sāma-Veda, has recently
(Burnell) been discovered in India; the Tāittirīya-Brāmaṇa is a collection of mingled mantra and
brāhmaṇa, like the saṁhitā of the same name, but supplementary and later. These works are
likewise regarded as canonical by the schools, and are learned by their sectaries with the same
extreme care which is devoted to the saṁhitās, and their condition of textual preservation is of
a kindred excellence. To a certain extent, there is among them the possession of common
material: a fact the bearings of which are not yet fully understood.
Notwithstanding the inanity of no small part of their contents, the Brāmaṇas are of a high
order of interest in their bearings on the history of Indian institutions; and philologically they
are not less important, since they represent a form of language in most respects intermediate
between the classical and that of the Vedas, and offer specimens on a large scale of a prose
style, and of one which is in the main a natural and freely developed one — the oldest and
most primitive Indo-European prose.
Beside the Brāhmaṇas are sometimes found later appendices, of a similar character, called
Āraṇyakas (forest-sections): as the Āitareya-Āraṇyaka, Tāittirīya-Āraṇyaka, Bṛhad-Āraṇyakas, and
so on. And from some of these, or even from the Brāhmaṇas, are extracted the earliest
Upaniṣads (sittings, lectures on sacred subjects ) — which,

however, are continued and added to down to a comparatively modern time. The Upanishads
are one of the lines by which the Brāhmaṇa literature passes over into the later theological
literature.
Another line of transition is shown in the Sūtras ( lines, rules). The works thus named are
analogous with the Brāhmaṇas in that they belong to the schools of Vedic study and are named
from them, and that they deal with the religious ceremonies: treating them, however, in the
way of prescription, not of dogmatic explanation. They, too, contain some mantra or hymn-
material, not found to occur elsewhere. In part (çrāuta or kalpa-sūtras), they take up the great
sacrificial ceremonies, with which the Brāhmaṇas have to do; in part (gṛhya-sūtras), they teach
the minor duties of a pious householder; in some cases (sā-mayācārika-sūtras) they lay down the
general obligations of one whose life is in accordance with prescribed duty. And out of the last
two, or especially the last, come by natural development the law-books (dharma-çāstras), which
make a conspicuous figure in later literature: the oldest and most noted of them being that
called by the name of Manu (an outgrowth, it is believed by many, of the Mānava Vedic school);
to which are added that of Yājnavalkya, and many others.
Respecting the chronology of this development, or the date of any class of writings, still
more of any individual work, the less that is said the better. All dates given in Indian literary
history are pins set up to be bowled down again. Every important work has undergone so many
more or less transforming changes before reaching the form in which it comes to us, that the
question of original construction is complicated with that of final redaction. It is so with the
law-book of Manu, just mentioned, which has well-founded claims to being regarded as one of
the very oldest works of the proper Sanskrit literature, if not the the oldest (it has variously
been assigned, to periods from six centuries before Christ to four after Christ). It is so, again,
in a still more striking degree, with the great legendary

epic of the Mahābhārata. The ground-work of this is doubtless of very early date; but it has
served as a text into which materials of various character and period have been inwoven, until
it has become a heterogeneous mass, a kind of cyclopedia for the warrior-caste, hard to
separate into its constituent parts. The story of Nala, and the philosophical poem Bhagavad-
Gītā, are two of the most noted of its episodes. The Rāmāyaṇa, the other most famous epic, is a
work of another kind: though also worked over and more or less altered in its transmission to
our time, it is the production, in the main, of a single author (Vālmīki); and it is generally
believed to be in part allegorical, representing the introduction of Aryan culture and dominion
into Southern India. By its side stand a number of minor epics, of various authorship and
period, as the Raghuvaṅça (ascribed to the dramatist Kālidāsa), the Māghakāvya, the
Bhaṭṭikāvya (the last, written chiefly with the grammatical intent of illustrating by use as many
as possible of the numerous formations which, though taught by the grammarians, find no place
in the literature).
The Purāṇas, a large class of works mostly of immense extent, are best mentioned in
connection with the epics. They are pseudo-historical and prophetic in character, of modern
date, and of inferior value. Real history finds no place in Sanskrit literature, nor is there any
conscious historical element in any of the works composing it.
Lyric poetry is represented by many works, some of which, as the Meghadūta and
Gītogovinda, are of no mean order of merit.
The drama is a still more noteworthy and important branch. The first indications of
dramatical inclination and capacity on the part of the Hindus are seen in certain hymns of the
Veda, where a mythological or legendary situation is conceived dramatically, and set forth in
the form of a dialogue — well-known examples are the dialogue of Saramā and the Paṇis, that
of Yama and his sister Yamī, that of Vasishtha and the rivers, that of Agni and the other gods
— but there are no extant intermediaries between these

and the standard drama. The beginnings of the latter date from a period when in actual life the
higher and educated characters used Sanskrit, and the lower and uneducated used the popular
dialects derived from it, the Prākrits; and their dialogue reflects this condition of things. Then,
however learning (not to call it pedantry) intervened, and stereotyped the new element; a
Prākrit grammar grew up beside the Sanskrit grammar, according to the rules of which Prākrit
could be made indefinitely on a substrate of Sanskrit; and none of the existing dramas need to
date from the time of the vernacular use of Prākrit, while most or all of them are undoubtedly
much later. Among the dramatic authors, Kālidāsa is incomparably the chief, and his Çakuntalā
is distinctly his masterpiece. His date has been a matter of much inquiry and controversy; it is
doubtless some centuries later than our era. The only other worked deserving to be mentioned
along with Kālidāsa’s is the Mṛcchakaṭī of Çūdraka, also of questionable period, but believed to
be the oldest of the extant dramas.
A partly dramatic character belongs also to the fable, in which animals are represented as
acting and speaking. The most noted works in this department are the Pañcatantra, which
through Persian and Semitic versions has made its way all over the world, and contributes a
considerable quota to the fable-literature of every European language, and, partly founded on it,
the comparatively recent and popular Hitopadeça (salutary instruction).
Two of the leading departments of Sanskrit scientific literature, the legal and the
grammatical, have already been sufficiently noticed; of those remaining, the most important is
by far the philosophical. The beginnings of philosophical speculation are seen already in some
of the later hymns of the Veda, more abundantly in the Brāhmaṇas and Āraṇyakas, and then
especially in the Upanishads. The evolution and historical relation of the systems of philosophy,
and the age of their text-books, are matters on which much obscurity still rests. There are six
systems of primary rank, and reckoned as orthodox, although really standing in no

accordance with approved religious doctrines. All of them seek the same end, the emancipation
of the soul from the necessity of continuing its existence in a succession of bodies, and its
unification with the All-soul; but they differ in regard to the means by which they seek to attain
this end.
The astronomical science of the Hindus is a reflection of that of Greece, and its literature is
of recent date; but as mathematicians, in arithmetic and geometry, they have shown more
independence. Their medical science, although its beginnings go back even to the Veda, in the
use of medicinal plants with accompanying incantations, is of little account, and its proper
literature by no means ancient.

CONTENTS.
Chap.
Page.
Preface
v
Introduction
xi
I. Alphabet
1–9
II. System of Sounds; Pronunciation
10–34
Vowels, 10; Consonants, 13; Quantity, 27; Accent, 28.
III.Rules of Euphonic Combination
34–87
Introductory, 
34; 
Principles, 
37; 
Rules 
of 
Vowel
Combination, 42; Permitted Finals, 49; Deaspiration, 53;
Surd and Sonant Assimilation, 54; Combinations of Final
s and r, 56; Conversion of s to ṣ, 61; Conversion of n to
ṇ, 64; Conversion of Dental Mutes to Linguals and
Palatals, 66; Combinations of Final n, 69; Combinations
of Final m, 71; the Palatal Mutes and Sibilant, and h,
72; the Lingual Sibilant, 77; Extension and Abbreviation,
78; Strengthening and Weakening Processes, 81; Guṇa
and Vṛddhi, 81; Vowel-lengthening, 84; Vowel-lightening,
85; Nasal Increment, 86; Reduplication, 87.
IV. Declension
88–110
Gender, Number, Case, 88; Uses of the Cases, 89;
Endings of declension, 103; Variation of Stem, 107;
Accent in Declension, 108.
V. Nouns and Adjectives
111–176
Classification etc., 111; Declension I., Stems in a, 112;
Declension II., Stems in i and u, 116; Declension III.,
Stems in Long Vowels (ā, ī, ū): A. Root-words etc., 124;
Stems in Diphthongs, 130; B. Derivative Stems etc., 131;
Declension IV., Stems in ṛ and ar, 137; Declension V.,
Stems in Consonants, 141; A. Root-stems etc., 143; B.
Derivative Stems in as, is, us, 153; C. Derivative Stems
in an, 156; D. in in, 161; E. in ant or at, 163; F. Perfect
Participles in vāṅs, 169; G. Comparatives in yāṅs or yas,
172; Comparison, 173.

Chap.
Page.
VI. Numerals
177–185
Cardinals, 177; Ordinals etc, 183.
VII.Pronouns
185–199
Personal, 185; Demonstrative, 188; Interrogative, 194;
Relative, 195; other Pronouns: Emphatic, Indefinite, 196;
Nouns used pronominally, 197; Pronominal Derivatives,
Posessives etc., 197; Adjectives declined pronominally,
199.
VIII.Conjugation
200–226
Voice, Tense, Mode, Number, Person, 200; Verbal
Adjectives and Nouns, 203; Secondary Conjugations, 203;
Personal Endings, 204; Subjunctive Mode, 209; Optative,
211; 
Imperative, 
213; 
Uses 
of 
the 
Modes, 
215;
Participles, 220; Augment, 220; Reduplication, 222;
Accent of the Verb, 223.
IX.The Present-System
227–278
General, 227; Conjugations and Conjugation Classes,
228; Root-Class (second or ad-class), 231; Reduplicating
Class (third or hu-class), 242; Nasal Class (seventh or
rudh-class), 250; nu and u-Classes (fifth and eight, or su-
and tan-classes), 254; nā-Class (ninth or krī-class), 260;
a-Class (first or bhū-class), 264; Accent á-Class (sixth or
tud-class), 269; ya-Class (fourth or div-class), 271;
Accented yá-Class or Passive Conjugation, 275; So-called
tenth or cur-class, 277; Uses of the Present and
Imperfect, 278.
X. The Perfect-System
279–296
Perfect Tense, 279; Perfect Participle, 291; Modes of the
Perfect, 292; Pluperfect, 295; Uses of the Perfect, 295.
XI.The Aorist-System
297–330
Classification, 297; I. Simple Aorist: 1. Root-Aorist, 299;
Passive Aorist 3d sing., 304; 2. the a-Aorist, 305; II. 3.
Reduplicated Aorist, 308; III. Sibilant Aorist, 313; 4. the
s-Aorist, 314; 5. the iṣ-Aorist, 320; 6. the siṣ-Aorist, 323;
7. The sa-Aorist, 325; Precative, 326; Uses of the Aorist,
328.
XII.The Future-Systems
330–339
I. The s-Future, 331; Preterit of the s-Future, Conditional,
334; II. The Periphrastic Future, 335; Uses of the
Futures and Conditional, 337.

Chap.
Page.
XIII.
Verbal Adjectives and Nouns: Participles, Infinitives,
Gerunds
340–360
Passive Participle in tá or ná, 340; Past Active Participle
in tavant, 344; Future Passive Participles, Gerundives,
345; Infinitives, 347; Uses of the Infinitives, 351;
Gerunds, 355; Adverbial Gerund in am, 359.
XIV.Derivative or Secondary Conjugation
360–391
I. Passive, 361; II. Intensive, 362; Present-System, 365;
Perfect, Aorist, Future, etc., 370; III. Desiderative, 372;
Present-System, 374; Perfect, Aorist, Future, etc., 376;
IV. Causative, 378; Present-System, 380; Perfect, Aorist,
Future, etc., 383; V. Denominative, 386.
XV.Periphrastic and Compound Conjugation
391–403
The Periphrastic Perfect, 392; Participial Periphrastic
Phrases, 394; Composition with Prepositional Prefixes,
395; Other Verbal Compound, 400.
XVI.Indeclinables
403–417
Adverbs, 
403; 
Prepositions, 
414; 
Conjuctions, 
416;
Interjections, 417.
XVII. Derivation of Declinable Stems
418–480
A. Primary Derivatives, 420; B. Secondary Derivatives,
454.
XVIII. Formation of Compound Stems
480–515
Classification, 480; I. Copulative Compounds, 485; II.
Determinative 
Compounds, 
489; 
A. 
Dependent
Compounds, 489; B. Descriptive Compounds, 494; III.
Secondary Adjective Compounds, 501; A. Possessive
Compounds, 501; B. Compound with Governed Final
Member, 511; Adjective Compounds as Nouns and as
Adverbs, 512; Anomalous Compounds 514; Stem-finals
altered in Composition, 514; Loose Construction with
Compounds, 515.
Appendix
516–520
A. Examples of Various Sanskrit Type, 516; B. Example
of Accentuated Text, 518; Synopsis of the conjugation of
roots bhū and kṛ, 520.
Sanskrit Index
521–539
General Index
540–551

ABBREVIATIONS.
AA. Āitareya-Āraṇyaka
AB. Āitareya-Brāhmaṇa.
AÇS. Āçvalāyana-Çrāuta-Sūtra.
AGS. Āçvalāyana-Gṛhya-Sūtra.
Āpast. Āpastamba-Sūtra.
APr. Atharva-Prātiçākhya.
AV. Atharva-Veda.
B. or Br. Brāhmaṇas.
BAU. Bṛhad-Āraṇyaka-Upaniṣad.
BhG. Bhagavad-Gītā.
BhP. Bhāgavata-Purāṇa.
BR. Böhtlingk and Roth (Petersburg Lexicon).
C. Classical Sanskrit.
Ç. Çakuntalā.
Çatr. Çatruṁjaya-Māhātmyam.
ÇB. Çatapatha-Brāhmaṇa.
ÇÇS. Çān̄khāyana-Çrāuta-Sūtra.
ÇGS. Çān̄khāyana-Gṛhya-Sūtra.
ChU. Chāndogya-Upaniṣad.
ÇvU. Çvetāçvatara-Upaniṣad.
DKC. Daça-Kumāra-Carita.
E. Epos (MBh. and R.).
GB. Gopatha-Brāhmaṇa.
GGS. Gobhilīya-Gṛhya-Sūtra.
H. Hitopadeça.
Har. Harivança.
JB. Jāiminīya (or Talavakāra) Brāhmaṇa.
JUB. Jāiminīya-Upaniṣad-Brāhmaṇa.
K. Kāṭhaka.
Kap. Kapiṣṭhala-Saṁhitā.
KB. Kāuṣītaki- (or Çān̄khāyana-) Brāhmaṇa.
KBU. Kāuṣītaki-Brāhmaṇa-Upaniṣad.
KÇS. Kātyāyana-Çrāuta-Sūtra.
KS. Kāuçika-Sūtra.
KSS. Kathā-Sarit-Sāgara.
KṭhU. Kaṭha Upaniṣad.
KU. Kena-Upaniṣad.
LÇS. Lātyāyana-Çrāuta-Sūtra.
M. Manu.
MāiU. Māitri-Upaniṣad.

MBh. Mahābhārata.
MḍU. Muṇḍaka-Upaniṣad.
Megh. Meghadūta.
MS. Māitrāyaṇī-Saṁhitā.
Nāiṣ. Nāiṣadhīya.
Nir. Nirukta.
Pañc. Pañcatantra.
PB. Pañcaviṅça- (or Tāṇḍya-) Brāhmaṇa.
PGS. Pāraskara-Gṛhya-Sūtra.
PU. Praçna Upaniṣad.
R. Rāmāyaṇa.
Ragh. Raghuvaṅça.
RPr. Rigveda-Prātiçākhya.
RT. Rājā-Taran̄ginī.
RV. Rig-Veda.
S. Sūtras.
ṢB. Ṣaḍviṅça-Brāhmaṇa.
Spr. Indische Sprüche (Böhtlingk).
SV. Sāma-Veda.
TA. Tāittirīya-Āraṇyaka.
TB. Tāittirīya-Brāhmaṇa.
TPr. Tāittirīya-Prātiçākhya.
Tribh. Tribhāṣyaratna (comm. to TPr).
TS. Tāittirīya-Saṁhitā.
U. Upaniṣads.
V. Vedas (RV., AV., SV.).
Vas. Vasiṣṭha.
VBS. Varāha-Bṛhat-Saṁhitā.
Vet. Vetālapañcaviṅçatī.
Vikr. Vikramorvaçi.
VPr. Vājasaneyi-Prātiçākhya.
VS. Vājasaneyi-Saṁhitā.
VS. Kāṇ. do. Kāṇva-text.
Y. Yājñavalkya.

CHAPTER I.
ALPHABET.
1. The natives of India write their ancient and sacred language in a variety of alphabets —
generally, in each part of the country, in the same alphabet which they use for their own
vernacular. The mode of writing, however, which is employed throughout the heart of Aryan
India, or in Hindustan proper, is alone adopted by European scholars: it is called the
devanāgarī.
a. This name is of doubtful origin and value. A more comprehensive name is nāgarī
(perhaps, of the city); and deva-nāgarī is nāgarī of the gods , or of the Brahmans.
2. Much that relates to the history of the Indian alphabets is still obscure. The earliest
written monuments of known date in the country are the inscriptions containing the edicts of
Açoka or Piyadasi, of about the middle of the third century B.C. They are in two different
systems of characters, of which one shows distinct signs of derivation from a Semitic source,
while the other is also probably, though much less evidently, of the same origin. From the
latter, the Laṭh, or Southern Açoka character (of Girnar), come the later Indian alphabets, both
those of the northern Aryan languages and those of the southern Dravidian languages. The
nāgarī, devanāgarī, Bengālī, Guzerātī, and others, are varieties of its northern derivatives; and
with them are related some of the alphabets of peoples outside of India — as in Tibet and
Farther India — who have adopted Hindu culture or religion.
a. There is reason to believe that writing was first employed in India for practical purposes
— for correspondence and business and the like — and only by degrees came to be applied to
literary use. The literature, to a great extent, and the most fully in proportion to its claimed
sanctity and authority, ignores all written record, and assumes to be kept in existence by oral
tradition alone.

3. Of the devanāgarī itself there are minor varieties, depending on differences of locality or
of period, as also of individual hand (see examples in Weber’s catalogue of the Berlin Sanskrit
MSS., in Rājendralāla Mitra’s notices of MSS. in Indian libraries, in the published fac-similes of
inscriptions, and so on); and these are in some measure reflected in the type prepared for
printing, both in India and in Europe. But a student who makes himself familiar with the one
style of printed characters will have little difficulty with the others, and will soon learn, by
practice, to read the manuscripts. A few specimens of types other than those used in this work
are given in Appendix A.
a. On account of the difficulty of combining them with the smaller sizes of our Roman and
Italic type, the devanāgarī characters are used below only in connection with the first or
largest size. And, in accordance with the laudable usage of recent grammars, they are,
wherever given, also transliterated, in Clarendon letters; while the latter alone are used in the
other sizes.
4. The student may be advised to try to familiarize himself from the start with the
devanāgarī mode of writing. At the same time, it is not indispensable that he should do so until,
having learned the principal paradigms, he comes to begin reading and analysing the parsing;
and many will find the latter the more practical, and in the end equally or more effective, way.
5. The characters of the devanāgarī alphabet, and the European letters which will be used
in transliterating them, are as follows:
Vowels
short
long
simple
1 अ a
2 आ ā
palatal
3 इ i
4 ई ī
labial
5 उ u
6 ऊ ū
lingual
7 ऋ ṛ
8 ॠ ṝ
dental
9 ऌ ḷ
[10 ॡ [ḹ]
diphthongs
palatal
11 ए e
12 ऐ āi
labial
13 ओ o
14 औ āu
Visarga
15 अः ḥ
Anusvāra
16 अं, अँ ṅ or ṁ (see 73 c).
surd
surd asp.
sonant
son.asp.
nasal
Mutes
guttural
17 क k
18 ख kh
19 ग g
20 घ gh
21 ङ n̄
palatal
22 च c
23 छ ch
24 ज j
25 झ jh
26 ञ ñ
lingual
27 ट ṭ
28 ठ ṭh
29 ड ḍ
30 ढ ḍh
31 ण ṇ
dental
32 त t
33 थ th
34 द d
35 ध dh
36 न n
labial
37 प p
38 फ ph
39 ब b
40 भ bh
41 म m

Semivowels
palatal
42 य y
lingual
43 र r
dental
44 ल l
labial
45 व v
Sibilants
palatal
46 श ç
lingual
47 ष ṣ
dental
48 स s
Aspiration
49 ह h
a. To these may be added a lingual ḻ ळ, which in some of the Vedic texts takes the place of
ड ḍ when occurring between two vowels (54).
6. A few other sounds, recognized by the theories of the Hindu grammarians, but either
having no separate characters to represent them or only very rarely and exceptionally written,
will be noticed below (71 b, c, 230). Such are the guttural and labial breathings, the nasal
semivowels, and others.
7. The order of arrangement given above is that in which the sounds are catalogued and
described by the native grammarians; and it has been adopted by the European scholars as the
alphabetic order, for indexes, dictionaries, etc.: to the Hindus, the idea of an alphabetic
arrangement for such practical uses is wanting.
a. In some works (as the Petersburg lexicon), a visarga which is regarded as equivalent to
and exchangeable with a sibilant (172) is, though written as a visarga, given the alphabetic
place of the sibilant.
8. The theory of the devanāgarī, as of the other Indian modes of writing, is syllabic and
consonantal. That is to say, it regards as the written unit, not the simple sound, but the syllable
(akṣara); and further, as the substantial part of the syllable, the consonant or the consonants
which precede the vowel — this latter being merely implied, or, if written, being written by a
subordinate sign attached to the consonant.
9. Hence follow these two principles:
A. The forms of the vowel-characters given in the alphabetical scheme above are used only
when the vowel

forms a syllable by itself, or is not combined with a preceding consonant; that is, when it is
either initial or preceded by another vowel. In combinations with a consonant, other modes of
representation are used.
B. If more consonants than one precede the vowel, forming with it a single syllable, their
characters must be combined into a single compound character.
a. Native Hindu usage, in manuscripts and inscriptions, treats the whole material of a
sentence alike, not separating its words from one another, any more than the syllables of the
same word: a final consonant is combined into one written syllable with the initial vowel or
consonant or consonants of the following word. It never occurred to the Hindus to space their
words in any way, even where the mode of writing admitted such treatment; nor to begin a
paragraph on a new line; nor to write one line of verse under another: everything, without
exception, is written solid by them, filling the whole page.
b. Thus, the sentence and verse-line ahaṁ rudrebhir vasubhiç carāmy aham ādityāir uta
viçvadevāiḥ (Rig-Veda X, 125. 1: see Appendix B) I wander with the Vasus, the Rudras, I with
the Ādityas and the All-Gods is thus syllabized: a haṁ ru dre bhi rva su bhi çca rā mya ha mā
di tyāi ru ta vi çva de vāiḥ, with each syllable ending with a vowel (or a vowel modified by the
nasal-sign anusvāra, or having the sign of a final breathing, visarga, added: these being the
only elements that can follow a vowel in the same syllable); and it is (together with the next
line) written in the manuscripts after this fashion:
अहँेिभवसुिभराहमािदै
तिवदेवैः।अहंिमावणोभा
िबभहिमाीहमिनोभा॥
Each syllable is written separately, and by many scribes the successive syllables are parted
a little from one another: thus,
अ हँ  े िभ व सु िभ  रा  ह मा िद ै
and so on.
c. In Western practice, however, it is almost universally customary to divide paragraphs, to
make the lines of verse follow one another, and also to separate the words so far as this can be
done without changing the mode of writing them. See Appendix B, where the verse here given
so treated.
d. Further, in works prepared for beginners in the language, it is not uncommon to make a
more complete separation of words by a

free use of the virāma-sign (11) under final consonants: thus, for example,
अहँ ेिभ वसुिभ चरा् अहम् आिदै उत िवदेवैः।
or even by indicating also the combinations of initial and final vowels (126, 127): for
example,
अहं िमावणो भा िबभ् अहम् इाी अहम् अिनो भा॥
e. In transliterating, Western methods of separation of words are of course to be followed;
to do otherwise would be simple pedantry.
10. Under A, it is to be noticed that the modes of indicating a vowel combined with a
preceding consonant are as follows:
a. The short अ a has no written sign at all; the consonant-sign itself implies a following अ a,
unless some other vowel-sign is attached to it (or else the virāma: 11). Thus, the consonant-
signs as given above in the alphabetic scheme are really the signs of the syllables ka, kha, etc.
etc. (to ha).
b. The long आ ā is written by a perpendicular stroke after the consonant: thus, का kā, दा dā,
हा hā.
c. Short इ i and long ई ī are written by a similar stroke, which for short i is placed before
the consonant and for long ī is placed after it, and in either case is connected with the
consonant by a hook above the upper line: thus, िक ki, की kī; िभ bhi, भी bhī; िन ni, नी nī.
The hook above, turning to the left or to the right, is historically the essential part of the
character, having been originally the whole of it; the hooks were only later prolonged, so as to
reach all the way down beside the consonant. In the MSS., they almost never have the
horizontal stroke drawn across them above, though this is added in the printed characters:
thus, originally 
 ki, 
 kī; in the MSS. 
, 
; in print िक, की.
d. The u-sounds, short and long, are written by hooks attached to the lower end of the
consonant-sign: thus क ku, क kū; ड du, ड dū. On account of the necessities of combination, du
and dū are somewhat disguised: thus, 
, 
; and the forms with र r and ह h are still more
irregular: thus,  ru,  rū;  hu,  hū.

e. The ṛ-vowels, short and long, are written by a subjoined hook, single or double, opening
toward the right: thus,  kṛ, कॄ kṝ;  dṛ, दॄ dṝ. In the h-sign, the hooks are usually attached to
the middle, thus:  hṛ, हॄ hṝ.
As to the combination of ṛ with preceding r, see below, 14 d.
f. The ḷ-vowel is written with a reduced form of its full initial character: thus,  kḷ; the
corresponding long has no real occurrence (23 a), but would be written with a similar reduced
sign.
g. The diphthongs are written by strokes, single or double, above the upper line, combined,
for ओ o and औ āu, with the ā-sign after the consonant: thus, के ke, कै kāi; को ko, कौ kāu.
h. In some devanāgarī manuscripts (as the Bengālī alphabet), the single stroke above, or
one of the double ones, is replaced by a sign like the ā-sign before the consonant, thus: 
 ke,
 kāi; 
 ko, 
 kāu.
11. A consonant-sign, however, is capable of being made to signify the consonant-sound
alone, without an added vowel, by having written beneath it a stroke called the virāma (rest,
stop): thus, क k,  d,  h.
a. Since, as was pointed out above, the Hindus write the words of a sentence continuously
like one word (9 a, 9 b), the virāma is in general called for only when a final consonant occurs
before a pause. But it is also occasionally resorted to by scribes, or in print, in order to avoid
an awkward or difficult combination of consonant-signs: thus,
िलडिभः liḍbhiḥ, िलटसु liṭsu, अङ an̄kṣva;
and it is used to make a separation of words in texts prepared for beginners (9 d).
12. Under B, it is to be noticed that the consonant combinations are for the most part not
at all difficult to make or to recognize for one who is familiar with the simple signs. The
characteristic part of a consonant-sign that is to be added to another is taken (to the exclusion
of the horizontal or of the perpendicular framing-line, or of both), and they are put together
according to convenience,

either side by side, or one above the other; in a few combinations either arrangement is
allowed. The consonant that is to be pronounced first is set before the other in the one order,
and above it in the other order.
a. Examples of side-by-side arrangement are: ग gga,  jja,  pya,  nma,  ttha,  bhya,
 ska,  ṣṇa,  tka.
b. Examples of the above-and-below arrangement are:  kka, व kva,  cca,  ñja,  dda, 
pta,  tna,  tva.
13. In some cases, however, there is more or less abbreviation or disguise of the
independent form of a consonant-sign in combination. Thus,
a. Of क k in  kta,  kla; and in ण kṇa etc.
b. Of त t in  tta;
c. Of द d in  dga, न dna, etc;
d. Of म m and य y, when following other consonants: thus,  kya,  kma, य ñya,  dma,
 dya,  hma,  hya, य chya,  ḍhya.
e. Of श ç, which generally becomes 
 when followed by a consonant: thus, 
 çca, 
çna, 
 çva, 
 çya. The same change is usual when a vowel-sign is added below: thus 
 çu,
 çṛ.
f. Other combinations, of not quite obvious value, are  ṇṇa,  lla,  ddha,  dbha,  ṣṭa, 
ṣṭha; and the compounds of ह h: as  hṇa,  hna.
g. In a case or two, no trace of the constituent letters in recognizable: thus,  kṣa,  jña.
14. The semivowel र r, in making combinations with other consonants, is treated in a wholly
peculiar manner, analogous with that in which the vowels are treated.
a. If pronounced before another consonant or combination of consonants, it is written above
the latter, with a

hook opening to the right (much like the sign of the vowel ṛ, as written under a consonant: 10
e): thus, क rka, ष rṣa,  rtva,  rmya,  rtsna.
b. Then, if a consonant-group thus containing r as first member is followed by a vowel that
has its sign, or a part of its sign, or its sign of nasality (anusvāra: 70, 71), written above the
line, the r-sign is placed furthest to the right: thus, क rke, क rkaṅ, क rki, क rkī, क rko, क
rkīṅ, क rkoṅ.
c. If r is pronounced after another consonant, whether before a vowel or before yet another
consonant, it is written with a straight stroke below, slanting to the left: thus,  pra,  dhra, 
gra,  sra, 
 ddhra,  ntra, 
 grya, 
 srva,  ntrya; and, with modifications of a
preceding consonant-sign like those noticed above (13),  tra,  dra,  çra,  hra.
d. When र r is to be combined with a following ऋ ṛ, it is the vowel which is written in full,
with its initial character, and the consonant in subordination to it: thus, 
 rṛ.
15. Further combinations, of three, four, or even five consonant-signs, are made according
to the same rules. Examples are:
of three consonants,  ttva,  ddhya,  dvya, य drya, य dhrya,  psva,  çcya,
य ṣṭhya,  hvya;
of four consonants,  ktrya,  n̄kṣya, य ṣṭrya,  tsmya;
of five consonants, ा rtsnya.
a. The manuscripts, and the type-fonts as well, differ from one another more in their
management of consonant combinations than in any other respect, often having peculiarities
which one needs a little practice to understand. It is quite useless to give in a grammar the
whole series of possible combinations (some of them excessively rare) which are provided for in
any given type-font, or even in all. There is nothing which due familiarity

with the simple signs and with the above rules of combination will not enable the student
readily to analyse and explain.
16. a. A sign called the avagraha (separator) — namely ऽ — is occasionally used in the
manuscripts, sometimes in the manner of a hyphen, sometimes as a mark of hiatus, sometimes
to mark the elision of initial अ a after final ए e or ओ o (135). In printed texts, especially
European, it is ordinarily applied to use the last mentioned, and to that alone: thus, ते ऽुवन् te
'bruvan, सो ऽवीत् so 'bravīt, for te abruvan, so abravīt.
b. If the elided initial-vowel is nasal, and has the anusvāra-sign (70, 71) written above, this
is usually and more properly transferred to the eliding vowel; but sometimes it is written
instead over the avagraha-sign: thus, for so 'ṅçumān, from so aṅçumān, either स ऽुमान् or सो
ऽ◌ंुमान्.
c. The sign ॰ is used in place of something that is omitted, and to be understood from the
connection: thus, वीरसेनसुतस् ॰तम् ॰तेन vīrasenasutas -tam -tena.
d. Signs of punctuation are । and ॥.
At the end of a verse, a paragraph, or the like, the latter of them is ordinarily written twice,
with the figure of enumeration between: thus, ॥२०॥
17. The numeral figures are
१ 1, २ 2, ३ 3, ४ 4, ५ 5, ६ 6, ७ 7, ८ 8, ९ 9, ० 0
In combination, to express larger numbers, they are used in precisely the same way as
European digits: thus, २५ 25, ६३० 630, ७००० 7000, १८९६ 1896.
18. The Hindu grammarians call the different sounds, and the characters representing them,
by a kāra (maker) added to the sound of the letter, if a vowel, or to the letter followed by a, if
consonant. Thus, the sound or character a is called akāra; k is kakāra; and so on. But the kāra
is also omitted, and a, ka, etc. are used alone. The r, however, is not called rakāra, but only
ra, or repha snarl: the sole example of a specific name for an alphabetic element of its class.
The anusvāra and visarga are also known by those names alone.

CHAPTER II.
SYSTEM OF SOUNDS; PRONUNCIATION.
I. Vowels.
19. The a, i, and u-vowels. The Sanskrit has these three earliest and most universal vowels
of Indo-European language, in both short and long form — अ a and आ ā, इ i and ई ī, उ u and ऊ
ū. They are to be pronounced in the “Continental” or “Italian” manner — as in far or farther,
pin and pique, pull and rule.
20. The a is the openest vowel, an utterance from the expanded throat, stands in no
relation of kindred with any of the classes of consonantal sounds, and has no corresponding
semivowel. Of the close vowels i and u, on the other hand, i is palatal, and shades through its
semivowel y into the palatal and guttural consonant-classes; u is similarly related, through its
semivowel v, to the labial class, as involving in its utterance a narrowing and rounding of the
lips.
a. The Paninean scheme (commentary to Pāṇini’s grammar i. 1. 9) classes a as guttural, but
apparently only to give that series as well as the rest a vowel; no one of the Prātiçākhyas puts
a into one class with k etc. All of these authorities concur in calling the i- and u-vowels
respectively palatal and labial.
21. The short a is not pronounced in India with the full openness of ā, as its corresponding
short, but usually as the “neutral vowel” (English so-called “short u”, of but, son, blood, etc.).
This peculiarity appears very early, being acknowledged by Pāṇini and by two of the
Prātiçākhyas (APr. i. 36; VPr. i. 72), which call the utterance saṁvṛta, covered up, dimmed. It
is wont to be ignored by Western scholars, except those who have studied in India.
22. The a-vowels are the prevailing vowel-sounds of the language, being about twice as
frequent as all the others (including diphthongs) taken together. The i-vowels, again, are about
twice as numerous as the u-vowels. And, in each pair, the short vowel is more than twice (2½
to 3 times) as common as the long.
a. For more precise estimates of frequency, of these and of the other

alphabetic elements, and for the way in which they were obtained, see below, 75.
23. The ṛ- and ḷ-vowels. To the three simple vowels already mentioned the Sanskrit adds two
others, the ṛ-vowel and the ḷ-vowel, plainly generated by the abbreviation of syllables containing
respectively a  r or ल् l along with another vowel: the ऋ ṛ coming almost always (see 237,
241–3) from अ ar or र ra, the ḷ from अल् al.
a. Some of the Hindu grammarians add to the alphabet also a long ḷ: but this is only for the
sake of an artificial symmetry, since the sound does not occur in a single genuine word in the
language.
24. The vowel ऋ ṛ is simply a smooth or untrilled r-sound, assuming a vocalic office in
syllable-making — as, by a like abbreviation, it has done also in certain Slavonic languages. The
vowel ऌ ḷ is an l-sound similarly uttered — like the English l-vowel in such words as able,
angle, addle.
a. The modern Hindus pronounce these vowels as ri, rī, li (or even lri), having long lost the
habit and the facility of giving a vowel value to the pure r- and l-sounds. Their example is
widely followed by European scholars; and hence also the (distorting and altogether
objectionable) transliterations ṛi, ṛī, ḷi. There is no real difficulty in the way of acquiring and
practising the true utterance.
b. Some of the grammarians (see APr. i. 37, note) attempt to define more nearly the way in
which, in these vowels, a real r- or l-element is combined with something else.
25. Like their corresponding semivowels, r and l, these vowels belong respectively in the
general lingual and dental classes; the euphonic influence of ṛ and ṝ (189) shows this clearly.
They are so ranked in the Paninean scheme; but the Prātiçākhyas in general strangely class
them with the jihvāmūlīya sounds, our “gutturals” (39).
26. The short ṛ is found in every variety of word and of position, and is not rare, being just
about as frequent as long ū. Long ṝ is very much more unusual, occurring only in certain plural
cases of noun-stems in ṛ (371 b, d, 375). The ḷ is met with only in some of the forms and
derivatives of a single not very common verbal root (kḷp).
27. The diphthongs. Of the four diphthongs, two, the ए e and the ओ o, are in great part
original Indo-European

sounds. In the Sanskrit, they wear the aspect of being products of the increment or
strengthening of इ i and उ u respectively; and they are called the corresponding guṇa-vowels to
the latter (see below, 235 ff.). The other two, ऐ āi and औ āu, are held to be of peculiar
Sanskrit growth; they are also in general results of another and higher increment of इ i and उ
u, to which they are called the corresponding vṛddhi-vowels (below, 235 ff.). But all are
likewise sometimes generated by euphonic combination (127); and ओ o, especially, is common
as a result of the alteration of a final अस् as (175).
28. The ए e and ओ o are, both in India and Europe, usually pronounced as they are
transliterated — that is, as a long e- (English “long a”, or e in they) and o-sounds, without
diphthongal character.
a. Such they apparently already were to the authors of the Prātiçākhyas, which, while
ranking them as diphthongs (sandhyakṣara), give rules respecting their pronunciation in a
manner implying them to be virtually unitary sounds. But their euphonic treatment (131–4)
clearly shows them to have been still at the period when the euphonic laws established
themselves, as they of course were at their origin, real diphthongs, ai (a + i) and au (a + u).
From them, on the same evidence, the heavier or vṛddhi diphthongs were distinguished by the
length of their a-element, as āi (ā + i) and āu (ā + u).
b. The recognizable distinctness of the two elements in the vṛddhi-diphthongs is noticed by
the Prātiçākhyas (see APr. i. 40, note); but the relation of those elements is either defined as
equal, or the a is made of less quantity than the i and u.
29. The lighter or guṇa-diphthongs are much more frequent (6 or 7 times) than the heavier
o r vṛddhi-diphthongs, and the e and āi than the o and āu (a half more). Both pairs are
somewhat more than half as common as the simple i- and u-vowels.
30. The general name given by the Hindu grammarians to the vowels is svara tone; the
simple vowels are called samānākṣara homogeneous syllable, and the diphthongs are called
sandhyakṣara combination-syllable. The position of the organs in their utterance is defined to be
one of openness, or of non-closure.
a. As to quantity and accent, see below 76 ff., 80 ff.

II. Consonants
31. The Hindu name for ‘consonant’ is vyañjana manifester. The consonants are divided by
the grammarians into sparça contact or mute, antaḥsthā, intermediate or semivowel, and ūṣman
spirant. They will here be taken up and described in this order.
32. Mutes. The mutes, sparça, are so called as involving a complete closure or contact
(sparça), and not an approximation only, of the mouth-organs by which they are produced. They
are divided into five classes or series (varga), according to the organs and parts of organs by
which the contact is made; and each series is composed of five members, differing according to
the accompaniments of the contact.
33. The five mute-series are called respectively guttural, palatal, lingual (or cerebral),
dental, and labial; and they are arranged in the order as just mentioned, beginning with the
contact made furthest back in the mouth, coming forward from point to point, and ending with
the frontmost contact.
34. In each series there are two surd members, two sonant, and one nasal (which is also a
sonant): for example, in the labial series प् p and फ ph, ब् b and भ् bh, and म् m.
a. The members are by the Hindu grammarians called respectively first, second, third,
fourth, and last or fifth.
b. The surd consonants are known as aghoṣa toneless, and the sonants as ghoṣavant having
tone; and the descriptions of the grammarians are in accordance with these terms. All alike
recognize a difference of tone, and not in any manner a difference of force, whether of contact
or of expulsion, as separating the two great classes in question. That the difference depends on
vivāra opening or saṁvāra closure (of the glottis), is also recognized by them.
35. The first and third members of each series are the ordinary corresponding surd and
sonant mutes of European languages: thus, क k and ग् g, त् t and  d, प् p and ब् b.
36. Nor is the character of the nasal any more doubtful. What म m is to प् p and ब् b, or न्
n to त् t and  d, that is also each other nasal to its own series of mutes: a sonant expulsion
into and through the nose, while the mouth-organs are in the mute-contact.

a. The Hindu grammarians give distinctly this definition. The nasal ( anunāsika passing
through the nose) sounds are declared to be formed by mouth and nose together; or their
nasality (ānunāsikya) to be given them by unclosure of the nose.
37. The second and fourth of each series are aspirates: thus, beside the surd mute क k we
have the corresponding surd aspirate ख् kh, and beside the sonant ग् g, the corresponding
sonant aspirate घ् gh. Of these, the precise character is more obscure and difficult to
determine.
a. That the aspirates, all of them, are real mutes or contact sounds, and not fricative (like
European th and ph and ch, etc.), is beyond question.
b. It is also not doubtful in what way the surd th, for example, differs from the unaspirated
t: such aspirates are found in many Asiatic languages, and even in some European; they involve
the slipping-out of an audible bit of flatus or aspiration between the breach of mute-closure and
the following sound, whatever it may be. They are accurately enough represented by the th
etc., with which, in imitation of the Latin treatment of the similar ancient Greek aspirates, we
are accustomed to write them.
c. The sonant aspirates are generally understood and described as made in a similar way,
with a perceptible h-sound after the breach of sonant mute-closure But there are great
theoretical difficulties in the way of accepting this explanation; and some of the best phonetic
observers deny that the modern Hindu pronunciation is of such a character, and define the
element following the mute as a “glottal buzz”, rather, or as an emphasized utterance of the
beginning of the succeeding sound. The question is one of great difficulty, and upon it the
opinions of the highest authorities are much at variance. Sonant aspirates are still in use in
India, in the pronunciation of the vernacular as well as of the learned language.
d. By the Prātiçākhyas, the aspirates of both classes are called soṣman: which might mean
either accompanied by a rush of breath  (taking ūṣman in its more etymological sense), or
accompanied by a spirant (below, 59). And some native authorities define the surd aspirate as
made by the combination of each surd non-aspirate with its own corresponding surd spirant, the
h-sound (below, 65). But this would make the two classes of aspirates of quite diverse
character, and would also make th the same as ts, ṭh as ṭṣ, ch as cç — which is in any
measure plausible only of the last. Pāṇini has no name for aspirates; the scheme given in his
comment (to i. 1. 9) attributes to them mahāprāṇa great expiration, and to the non-aspirates
alpaprāṇa small expiration.
e. It is usual among European scholars to pronounce both classes of aspirates as the
corresponding non-aspirates

with a following h: for example थ् th nearly as in English boathook, फ ph as in haphazard, ध् dh
as in madhouse, भ् bh as in abhor, and so on. This is (as we have seen above) strictly accurate
only as regards the surd aspirates.
38. The sonant aspirates are (in the opinion of most), or at least represent, original Indo-
European sounds, while the surd aspirates are a special Indian development. The former are
more than twice as common as the latter. The unaspirated (non-nasal) mutes are very much
more frequent (5 times) than the aspirates (for the special frequency of bh and the original gh,
see 50 and 66); and among them the surds are more numerous (2½ times) than the sonants.
The nasals (chiefly n and m) are nearly as frequent as the surd non-aspirates.
We take up now the several mute series.
39. Guttural series: क k, ख् kh, ग् g, घ् gh, ङ n̄. These are the ordinary European k and g-
sounds, with their corresponding aspirates and nasal (the last, like English ng in singing).
a. The gutturals are defined by the Prātiçākhyas as made by contact of the base of the
tongue with the base of the jaw, and they are called, from the former organ, jihvāmūlīya
tongue-root sounds. The Paninean scheme describes them simply as made in the throat ( kaṇṭha).
From the euphonic influence of a k on a following s (below, 180), we may perhaps infer that in
their utterance the tongue was well drawn back in the mouth.
40. The k is by far the commonest of the guttural series, occurring considerably more often
than all the other four taken together. The nasal, except as standing before one of the others of
the same series, is found only as final (after the loss of a following k: 386, 407) in a very small
number of words, and as product of the assimilation of final k to a following nasal (161).
41. The Sanskrit guttural series represents only a minority of Indo-European gutturals; these
last have suffered more and more general corruption than any other class of consonants. By
processes of alteration which began in the Indo-European period, the palatal mutes, the palatant
sibilant ç, and the aspiration h, have come from gutturals. See these various sounds below.
42. Palatal series: च् c, छ ch, ज् j,  jh, ञ् ñ.
The whole palatal series is derivative, being generated by the corruption of original
gutturals. The c comes from an original k — as does also, by another degree of alteration, the
palatal sibilant ç (see below, 64). The j, in like manner, comes from a g; but the

Sanskrit j includes in itself two degrees of alteration, one corresponding to the alteration of k
to c, the other to that of k to ç (see below, 219). The c is somewhat more common than the j
(almost as four to three). The aspirate ch is very much less frequent (a tenth of c), and comes
from the original group sk. The sonant aspirate jh is excessively rare (occurring but once in
RV., not once in AV., and hardly half-a-dozen times in the whole other language); where found,
it is either onomatopoetic or of anomalous or not Indo-European origin. The nasal, ñ, never
occurs except immediately before — or, in a small number of words, also after (201) — one of
the others of the same series.
43. Hence, in the euphonic processes of the language, the treatment of the palatals is in
many respects peculiar. In some situations, the original unaltered guttural shows itself — or, as
it appears from the point of view of the Sanskrit, the palatal reverts to its original guttural. No
palatal ever occurs as a final. The j is differently treated, according as it represents the one or
the other degree of alteration. And c and j (except artificially, in the algebraic rules of the
grammarians) do not interchange, as corresponding surd and sonant.
44. The palatal mutes are by European scholars, as by the modern Hindus also, pronounced
with the compound sounds of English ch and j (in church and judge).
a. Their description by the old Hindu grammarians, however, gives them a not less
absolutely simple character than belongs to the other mutes. They are called tālavya palatal,
and declared to be formed against the palate by the middle of the tongue. They seem to have
been, then, brought forward in the mouth from the guttural point, and made against the hard
palate at a point not far from the lingual one (below, 45), but with the upper flat surface of the
tongue instead of its point. Such sounds, in all languages, pass easily into the (English) ch- and
j- sounds. The value of the ch as making the preceding vowel “long by position” (227), and its
frequent origination from t + ç (203), lead to the suspicion that it, at least, may have had this
character from the beginning: compare 37 d, above.
45. Lingual series: ट ṭ, ठ ṭh, ड ḍ, ढ ḍh, ण् ṇ. The lingual mutes are by all the native
authorities defined as uttered with the tip of the tongue turned up and drawn back into the
dome of the palate (somewhat as the usual English smooth r is pronounced). They are called by
the grammarians mūrdhanya, literally head-sounds, capitals, cephalics; which term is in many
European grammars

rendered by ‘cerebrals’. In practice, among European Sanskritists, no attempt is made to
distinguish them from the dentals: ट ṭ is pronounced like त् t, ड ḍ like द d, and so on with the
rest.
46. The linguals are another non-original series of sounds, coming mainly from the phonetic
alteration of the next series, the dentals, but also in part occurring in words that have no
traceable Indo-European connection, and are perhaps derived from the aboriginal languages of
India. The tendency to lingualization is a positive one in the history of the language: dentals
easily pass into linguals under the influence of contiguous or neighboring lingual sounds, but
not the contrary; and all the sounds of the class become markedly more frequent in the later
literature. The conditions of their ordinary occurrence are briefly these: 1. ṣ comes from s,
much more rarely from ç, j, kṣ, in euphonic circumstances stated below (180, 218 ff.); 2. a
dental mute following ṣ is assimilated into it, becoming lingual ( ṭ, ṭh, ṇ: 197); 3. n is often
changed to ṇ after a lingual vowel or semivowel or sibilant in the same word (189 ff.); 4. ḍh,
which is of very rare occurrence, comes from assimilation of a dental after ṣ (198 a) or h
(222); 5. ṭ and ḍ come occasionally by substitution for some other sound which is not allowed
to stand as final (142, 145–7). When originated in these ways, the lingual letters may be
regarded as normal; in any other cases of their occurrence, they are either products of
abnormal corruption, or signs of the non-Indo-European character of the words in which they
appear.
a. In a certain number of passages numerically examined (below, 75), the abnormal
occurrences of lingual mutes were less than half of the whole number (74 out of 159), and
most of them (43) were of ṇ: all were found more frequent in the later passages. In the Rig-
Veda, only 15 words have an abnormal ṭ; only 6, such a ṭh; only 1, such a ḍh; about 20
(including 9 roots, nearly all of which have derivatives) show an abnormal ḍ, besides 9 that
have ṇḍ; and 30 (including 1 root) show an ṇ.
b. Taken all together, the linguals are by far the rarest class of mutes (about 1½ per cent.
of the alphabet) — hardly half as frequent even as the palatals.
47. Dental series: त् t, थ् th,  d, ध् dh, न् n. These are called by the Hindus also dantya
dental, and are described as formed at the teeth (or at the roots of the teeth), by the tip of the
tongue. They are practically the equivalents of our European t, d, n.
a. But the modern Hindus are said to pronounce their dentals with the

tip of the tongue thrust well forward against the upper teeth, so that these sounds get a slight
tinge of the quality belonging to the English and Modern Greek th-sounds. The absence of that
quality in the European (especially the English) dentals is doubtless the reason why to the ear
of a Hindu the latter appear more analogous with his linguals, and he is apt to use the linguals
in writing European words.
48. The dentals are one of the Indo-European original mute-classes. In their occurrence in
Sanskrit they are just about as frequent as all the other four classes taken together.
49. Labial series: प् p, फ ph, ब् b, भ् bh, म् m. These sounds are called oṣṭhya labial by the
Hindu grammarians also. They are, of course, the equivalents of our p, b, m.
50. The numerical relation of the labials are a little peculiar. Owing to the absence (or
almost entire absence) of b in Indo-European, the Sanskrit b also is greatly exceeded in
frequency by bh, which is the most common of all the sonant aspirates, as ph is the least
common of the surd. The nasal m (notwithstanding its frequent euphonic mutations when final:
212 ff.) occurs just about as often as all the other four members of the series together.
a. From an early period in the history of the language, but increasingly later, b and v
exchange with one another, or fail to be distinguished in the manuscripts. Thus, the double
root-forms bṛh and vṛh, bādh and vadh, and so on. In the Bengal manuscripts, v is widely
written instead of more original b.
51. Semivowels: य् y,  r, ल् l, व् v.
a. The name given to this class of sounds by the Hindu grammarians is antaḥsthā standing
between — either from their character as utterances intermediate between vowel and
consonant, or (more probably) from the circumstance of their being placed between the mutes
and spirants in the arrangement of the consonants.
b. The semivowels are clearly akin with the several mute series in their physical character,
and they are classified along with those series — though not without some discordances of view
— by the Hindu grammarians. They are said to be produced with the organs slightly in contact
(īṣatspṛṣṭa), or in imperfect contact (duḥspṛṣṭa).
52. The  r is clearly shown by its influence in the euphonic processes of the language to
be a lingual sound, or one made with the tip of the tongue turned up into the dome of the
palate. It thus resembles the English smooth r, and, like this, seems to have been untrilled.

a. The Paninean scheme reckons r as a lingual. None of the Prātiçākhyas, however, does so;
nor are they entirely consistent with one another in its description. For the most part, they
define it as made at “the roots of the teeth”. This would give it a position like that of the
vibrated r; but no authority hints at a vibration as belonging to it.
b. In point of frequency, r stands very high on the list of consonants; it is nearly equal with
v, n, m, and y, and only exceeded by t.
53. The ल् l is a sound of dental position, and is so defined and classed by all the native
authorities.
a. The peculiar character of an l-sound, as involving expulsion at the side of the tongue
along with contact at its tip, is not noticed by any Hindu phonetist.
b. The semivowels r and l are very widely interchangeable in Sanskrit, both in roots and in
suffixes, and even in prefixes: there are few roots containing a l which do not show also forms
with r; words written with the one letter are found in other texts, or in other parts of the same
text, written with the other. In the later period of the language they are more separated, and
the l becomes decidedly more frequent, though always much rarer than the r (only as 1 to 7 or
8 or 10).
{anchor|54}54. Some of the Vedic texts have another l-sound, written with a slightly
different character (it is given at the end of the alphabet, 5), which is substituted for a lingual
ḍ (as also the same followed by h for a ḍh) when occurring between two vowels. It is, then,
doubtless a lingual l, one made by breach (at the side of the tongue) of the lingual instead of
the dental mute-closure.
a. Examples are ईळे īḻe, for ईडॆ īḍe, but ई iḍya; मीषॆ mīḻhuṣe, for मीढषे mīḍhuṣe, but मीवान्
mīḍhvān. It is especially in the Rig-Veda and its auxiliary literature that this substitution is
usual.
55. The य् y in Sanskrit, as in other languages generally, stands at the closest relationship
with the vowel इ i (short or long); the two exchange with one another in cases innumerable.
a. And in the Veda (as the metre shows) an i is very often to be read where, in conformity
with the rules of the later Sanskrit euphony, a y is written. Thus the final i-vowel of a word
remains i before an initial vowel; that of a stem maintains itself unchanged before an ending;
and an ending of derivation — as ya, tya — has i instead of y. Such cases will be noticed in
more detail later. The constancy of the phenomenon in certain words and classes of words
shows that this was no merely optional interchange. Very probably, the Sanskrit y had
everywhere more of an i-character than belongs to the corresponding European sound.

56. The y is by its physical character a palatal utterance; and it is classed as a palatal
semivowel by the Hindu phonetists. It is one of the most common of Sanskrit sounds.
57. The व् v is pronounced as English or French v (German w) by the modern Hindus —
except when preceded by a consonant in the same syllable, in which case it has rather the
sound of English w; and European scholars follow the same practice (with or without the same
exception).
a. By its whole treatment in the euphony of the language, however, the v stands related to
an u-vowel precisely as y to an i-vowel. It is, then, a v only according the original Roman value
of that letter — that is to say, a w-sound in the English sense; though (as was stated above for
the y) it may well have been less markedly separated from u than English w, or more like
French ou in oui etc. But, as the original w has in most European languages been changed to v
(English), so also in India, and that from a very early time: the Paninean scheme and two of the
Prātiçākhyas (VPr. and TPr.) distinctly define the sound as made between the upper teeth and
the lower lip — which, of course, identifies it with the ordinarily modern v-sound. As a matter
of practice, the usual pronunciation need not be seriously objected to; yet the student should
not fail to note that the rules of Sanskrit euphony and the name of “semivowel” have no
application except to a w-sound in the English sense: a v-sound (German w) is no semivowel,
but a spirant, standing on the same articulate stage with the English th-sounds and the f.
58. The v is classed as a labial semivowel by the Hindu phonetical authorities. It has a
somewhat greater frequency than the y.
a. In the Veda, under the same circumstances as the y (above, 55 a), v is to be read as a
vowel, u.
b. As to the interchange of v and b, see above, 50 a.
59. Spirants. Under the name ūṣman (literally heat, steam, flatus), which is usually and well
represented by spirant, some of the Hindu authorities include all remaining sounds of the
alphabet; others apply the term only to the three sibilants and the aspiration — to which it will
here also be restricted.
a. The term is not found in the Paninean scheme; by different treatises the guttural and
labial breathings, these and the visarga, or all these and anusvāra, are also (in addition to the
sibilants and h) called ūṣman

(see APr. i., 31 note). The organs of utterance are described as being in the position of the
mute-series to which each spirant belongs respectively, but unclosed, or unclosed in the middle.
60. The स् s. Of the three sibilants, or surd spirants, this is the one of plainest and least
questioned character: it is the ordinary European s — a hiss expelled between the tongue and
the roof of the mouth directly behind the upper front teeth.
a. It is, then, dental, as it is classed by all the Hindu authorities. Notwithstanding the great
losses which it suffers in Sanskrit euphony; by conversion to the other sibilants, to r, to
visarga, etc., it is still very high among the consonants in the order of frequency, or
considerably more common than both the other two sibilants together.
61. The ष् ṣ. As to the character of this sibilant, also, there is no ground for real question: it
is the one produced in the lingual position, or with the tip of the tongue reverted into the dome
of the palate. It is, then, a kind of sh-sound; and by European Sanskritists it is pronounced as
an ordinary sh (French ch, German sch), no attempt being made (any more than in the case of
the other lingual sounds: 45) to give it its proper lingual quality.
a. Its lingual character is shown by its whole euphonic influence, and it is described and
classed as lingual by all the Hindu authorities (the APr. adds, i. 23, that the tongue in its
utterance is trough-shaped). In its audible quality, it is a sh-sound rather than a s-sound; and,
in the considerable variety of sibilant-utterance, even in the same community, it may coincide
with the sh of some among ourselves. Yet the general and normal sh is palatal (see below, 63);
and therefore the sign ṣ, marked in accordance with the other lingual letters, is the only
unexceptionable transliteration for the Hindu character.
b. In modern pronunciation in India, ṣ is much confounded with kh; and the manuscripts are
apt to exchange the characters. Some later grammatical treatises, too, take note of the
relationship.
62. This sibilant (as was noticed above, 46, and will be more particularly explained below,
180 ff.) is no original sound, but a product of the lingualization of s under certain euphonic
conditions. The exceptions are extremely few (9 out of 145 noted occurrences: 75), and of a
purely sporadic character. The Rig-Veda has (apart

from √ sah, 182 b) only twelve words which show a ṣ under other conditions.
a. The final ṣ of a root has in some cases attained a more independent value, and does not
revert to s when the euphonic conditions are removed, but shows anomalous forms (225–6).
63. The  ç. This sibilant is by all the native authorities classed and described as palatal,
nor is there anything in its history or euphonic treatment to cast doubt on its character as
such. It is, then, made with the flat of the tongue against the forward part of the palatal arch
— that is to say, it is the usual and normal sh-sound. By European scholars it is variously
pronounced — more often, perhaps, as s than as sh.
a. The two sh-sounds, ṣ and ç, are made in the same part of the mouth (the ṣ probably
rather further back), but with a different part of the tongue; and they are doubtless not more
unlike than, for example, the two t-sounds, written ṭ and t; and it would be not less proper to
pronounce them both as one sh than to pronounce the linguals and dentals alike. To neglect
the difference of s and ç is much less to be approved. The very near relationship of ṣ and ç is
attested by their euphonic treatment, which is to a considerable extent the same, and by their
not infrequent confusion by the writers of manuscripts.
64. As was mentioned above (41), the ç, like c, comes from the corruption of an original k-
sound, by loss of mute-contact as well as forward shift of the point of production. In virtue of
this derivation, it sometimes (though less often than c) “reverts” to k — that is, the original k
appears instead of it (43); while, on the other hand, as a sh-sound, it is to a certain extent
convertible to ṣ. In point of frequency, it slightly exceeds the latter.
65. The remaining spirant,  h, is ordinarily pronounced like the usual European surd
aspiration h.
a. This is not, however, its real character. It is defined by all the native authorities as not a
surd element, but a sonant (or else an utterance intermediate between the two); and its whole
value in the euphony of the language is that of a sonant: but what is its precise value is very
hard to say. The Paninean scheme ranks it as guttural, as it does also a: this means nothing.
The Prātiçākhyas bring it into no relation with the guttural class; one of them quotes the
opinion of some authorities that “it has the same position with the beginning of the following
vowel” (TPr. ii. 47) — which so far identifies it with our h. There is nothing in its euphonic
influence to mark it as retaining any trace of gutturally articulated character.

By some of the native phonetists it is identified with the aspiration of the sonant aspirates —
with the element by which, for example, gh differs from g. This view is supported by the
derivation of h from the aspirates (next paragraph), by that of ḷ + h from ḍh (54), and by the
treatment of initial h after a final mute (163).
66. The h, as already noticed, is not an original sound, but comes in nearly all cases from
an older gh (for the few instances of its derivation from dh and bh, see below, 223 g). It is a
vastly more frequent sound than the unchanged gh (namely, as 7 to 1): more frequent, indeed,
than any of the guttural mutes except k. It appears, like j (219), to include in itself two stages
of corruption of gh: one corresponding with that of k to c, the other with that of k to ç; see
below, 223, for the roots belonging to the two classes respectively. Like the other sounds of
guttural derivation, it sometimes exhibits “reversion” (43) to its original.
67. The ◌ः ḥ, or visarga (visarjanīya, as it is uniformly called by the Prātiçākhyas and by
Pāṇini, probably as belonging to the end of a syllable ), appears to be merely a surd breathing, a
final h-sound (in the European sense of h), uttered in the articulating position of the preceding
vowel.
a. One Prātiçākhya (TPr. ii. 48) gives just this last description of it. It is by various
authorities classed with h, or with h and a: all of them are alike sounds in whose utterance the
mouth-organs have no definite shaping action.
68. The visarga is not original, but always only a substitute for final s or r, neither of which
is allowed to maintain itself unchanged (170 ff.). It is a comparatively recent member of the
alphabetic system; the other euphonic changes of final s and r have not passed through visarga
as an intermediate stage. And the Hindu authorities are considerably discordant with one
another as to how far ḥ is a necessary substitute, and how far a permitted one, alternative with
a sibilant, before a following initial surd.
69. Before a surd guttural or labial,respectively, some of the native authorities permit, while
others require, conversion of final s or r into the so-called jihvāmūlīya and upadhmānīya
spirants. It may be fairly questioned, perhaps, whether these two sounds are not pure
grammatical abstractions, devised (like the long ḷ-vowel: 23 a) in order to round out the
alphabet to greater symmetry. At any rate, both manuscripts and printed texts in general make
no account of them. Whatever individual character they may have must be, it would seem, in
the direction of the (German) ch- and f-sounds. When written at all, they are wont to be
transliterated by χ and φ.

70. The ◌ं anusvāra, ṅ or ṁ, is a nasal sound lacking that closure of the organs which is
required to make a nasal mute or contact-sound (36); in its utterance there is nasal resonance
along with some degree of openness of the mouth.
71. There is discordance of opinion among both the Hindu phonetists and their modern
European successors respecting the real character of this element; hence a little detail is
necessary here with regard to its occurrence and their views of it.
a. Certain nasals in Sanskrit are of servile character, always to be assimilated to a following
consonant, of whatever character that may be. Such are final m in sentence-combination (213),
the penultimate nasal of a root, and a nasal of increment (255) in general. If one of these
nasals stands before a contact-letter or mute, it becomes a nasal mute corresponding the the
latter — that is, a nasal utterance in the same position of the mouth-organs which gives the
succeeding mute. If, on the other hand, the following consonant does not involve a contact
(being a semivowel or spirant), the nasal element is also without contact: it is a nasal utterance
with unclosed mouth-organs. The question is, now, whether this nasal utterance becomes merely
a nasal infection of the preceding vowel, turning it into a nasal vowel (as in French on, en, un,
etc., by reason of a similar loss of a nasal mute); or whether it is an element of more individual
character, having place between the vowel and the consonant; or, once more, whether it is
sometimes the one thing and sometimes the other. The opinions of the Prātiçākhyas and Pāṇini
are briefly as follows:
b. The Atharva-Prātiçākhya holds that the result is everywhere a nasalized vowel, except
when n or m is assimilated to a following l; in that case, the n or m becomes a nasal l: that is,
the nasal utterance is made in the l-position, and has a perceptible l-character.
c. The other Prātiçākhyas teach a similar conversion into a nasal counterpart to the
semivowel, or a nasal semivowel, before y and l and v (not before r also). In most of the other
cases where the Atharva-Prātiçākhya acknowledges a nasal vowel — namely, before r and the
spirants — the others teach the intervention after the vowel of a distinct nasal element, called
the anusvāra after-tone.
d. Of the nature of this nasal afterpiece to the vowel no intelligibly clear account is given. It
is said (RPr.) to be either vowel or consonant; it is declared (RPr., VPr.) to be made with the
nose alone, or (TPr.) to be nasal like the nasal mutes; it is held by some (RPr.) to be the
sonant tone of the nasal mutes; in its formation, as in that of the vowel and spirant, there is
(RPr.) no contact. As to its quantity, see further on.
e. There are, however, certain cases and classes of cases where these other authorities also
acknowledge a nasal vowel. So, especially, wherever

a final n is treated (208–9) as if it were ns (its historically older form); and also in a small
number of specified words. They also mention the doctrine of nasal vowel instead of anusvāra
as held by some (and TPr. is uncertain and inconsistent in its choice between the one and the
other).
f. In Pāṇini, finally, the prevailing doctrine is that of anusvāra everywhere, and it is even
allowed in many cases where the Prātiçākhyas prescribe only a nasal mute. But a nasal
semivowel is also allowed instead before a semivowel, and a nasal vowel is allowed in the cases
(mentioned above) where some of the Prātiçākhyas require it by exception.
g. It is evidently a fair question whether this discordance and uncertainty of the Hindu
phonetists is owing to a real difference of utterance in different classes of cases and in different
localities, or whether to a different scholastic analysis of what is really everywhere the same
utterance. If anusvāra is a nasal element following the vowel, it cannot well be any thing but
either a prolongation of the same vowel-sound with nasality added, or a nasalized bit of neutral-
vowel sound (in the latter case, however, the altering influence of an i or u-vowel on a
following s ought to be prevented, which is not the case: see 183).
72. The assimilated nasal element, whether viewed as nasalized vowel, nasal semivowel, or
independent anusvāra, has the value of something added, in making a heavy syllable, or length
by position (79).
a. The Prātiçākhyas (VPr., RPr.) give determinations of the quantity of the anusvāra
combining with a short and with a long vowel respectively to make a long syllable.
73. a. Two different signs, ◌ं and ◌ँ, are found in the manuscripts, indicating the nasal sound
here treated of. Usually they are written above the syllable, and there they seem most naturally
to imply a nasal affection of the vowel of the syllable, a nasal (anunāsika) vowel. Hence some
texts (Sāma- and Yajur-Vedas), when they mean a real anusvāra, bring one of the signs down
into the ordinary consonant-place; but the usage is not general. As between the two signs, some
manuscripts employ, or tend to employ, the ◌ँ where a nasalized (anunāsika) vowel is to be
recognized, and elsewhere the ◌ं; and this distinction is consistently observed in many European
printed texts; and the former is called the anunāsika sign: but the two are doubtless originally
and properly equivalent.
b. It is a very common custom of the manuscripts to write an anusvāra-sign for any nasal
following the vowel of a syllable, either before another consonant or as final (not before a
vowel), without any reference to whether it is to be pronounced as nasal mute, nasal
semivowel, or anusvāra. Some printed texts follow this slovenly and undesirable habit; but most
write a nasal mute whenever it is to be pronounced — excepting where it is an assimilated m
(213).

c. It is convenient also in transliteration to distinguish the assimilated m by a special sign,
ṁ, from the anusvāra of more independent origin, ṅ; and this method will be followed in the
present work.
74. This is the whole system of sounds recognized by the written character; for certain
other transitional sounds, more or less widely recognized in the theories of the Hindu
phonetists, see below, 230.
75. The whole spoken alphabet, then, may be arranged in the following manner, in order to
show, so far as is possible in a single scheme, the relations and important classifications of its
various members:
a. The figures set under the characters give the average percentage of frequency of each
sound, found by counting the number of times in which it occurred in an aggregate of 10,000
sounds of continuous text, in ten different passages, of 1,000 sounds each, selected from
different epochs of the literature: namely, two from the Rig-Veda, one from the Atharva-Veda,
two from different Brāhmaṇas, and one each from the Manu, Bhagavad-Gītā, Çakuntalā,
Hitopadeça, and Vāsa-vadattā (J.A.O.S., vol. X. p. c1).

III. Quantity of sounds and syllables.
76. The Hindu grammarians take the pains to define the quantity of a consonant (without
distinction among consonants of different classes) as half that of a short vowel.
77. They also define the quantity of a long (dīrgha) vowel or diphthong as twice that of a
short (hrasva) vowel — making no distinction in this respect between the guṇa- and the vṛddhi-
diphthongs.
78. Besides these two vowel-quantities, the Hindus acknowledge a third, called pluta
(literally swimming), or protracted, and having three moras or three times the quantity of a
short vowel. A protracted vowel is marked by a following figure 3: thus, आ३ ā3.
a. The protracted vowels are practically of rare occurrence (in RV., three cases; in AV.,
fifteen; in the Brāhmaṇa literature, decidedly more frequent). They are used in cases of
questioning, especially of a balancing between two alternatives, and also of calling to a distance
or urgently. The protraction is of the last syllable in a word, or in a whole phrase; and the
protracted syllable has usually the acute tone, in addition to any other accent the word may
have; sometimes it takes also anusvāra, or is made nasal.
b. Examples are: adháḥ svid āsī́3d upári svid āsī3t (RV.) was it, forsooth, below? was it,
forsooth, above> idám bhū́yā́3 idā́3m íti (AV.) saying, is this more, or is that?  ágnā́3i pátnīvā́3ḥ
sómam piba (TS.) O Agni! thou with thy spouse! drink the soma .
c. A diphthong is protracted by prolongation of its first or a-element: thus, e to ā3i, o to
ā3u.
d. The sign of protraction is also sometimes written as the result of accentual combination,
when so-called kampa occurs: see below, 87 d.
79. For metrical purposes, syllables (not vowels) are distinguished by the grammarians as
heavy (guru) or light (laghu). A syllable is heavy if its vowel is long, or short and followed by
more than one consonant (“long by position”). Anusvāra and visarga count as full consonants in

making heavy syllable. The last syllable of a pāda (primary division of a verse) is reckoned as
either heavy or light.
a. The distinction in terms between the difference of long and short in vowel-sound and that
of heavy and light in syllable-construction is valuable and should be observed.
IV. Accent.
80. The phenomena of accent are, by the Hindu grammarians of all ages alike, described
and treated as depending on a variation of tone or pitch; of any difference of stress involved,
they make no account.
81. The primary tones (svara) or accent-pitches are two: a higher (udātta raised), or acute;
and a lower (anudātta not raised), or grave. A third (called svarita: a term of doubtful meaning)
is always of secondary origin, being (when not enclitic: see below, 85) the result of actual
combination of an acute vowel and a following grave vowel into one syllable. It is also
uniformly defined as compound in pitch, a union of higher and lower tone within the limits of a
single syllable. It is thus identical in physical character with the Greek and Latin circumflex,
and fully entitled to be called by the same name.
82. Strictly, therefore, there is but one distinction of tone in the Sanskrit accentual system,
as described by the native grammarians and marked in the written texts: the accented syllable
is raised in tone above the unaccented; while then further, in certain cases of the fusion of an
accented and an unaccented element into one syllable, that syllable retains the compounded
tone of both elements.
83. The svarita or circumflex is only rarely found on a pure long vowel or diphthong, but
almost always on a syllable in which a vowel, short or long, is preceded by a y or v
representing an originally acute i- or u-vowel.
a. In transliteration, in this work, the udātta or acute will be marked with the ordinary sign
of the acute, and the svarita or circumflex (as being a downward slide of the voice forward)
with what is usually called the grave accent: thus, á, acute, yà or và, circumflex.

84. The Prātiçākhyas distinguish and name separately the circumflexed tones arising by
different processes of combination: thus, the circumflex is called
a. Kṣāipra (quick), when an acute i- or u-vowel (short or long) is converted into y or v
before a dissimilar vowel of grave tone: thus, vyā̀pta from ví-āpta, apsvàntár from apsú antár.
b. Jātya (native) or nitya (own), when the same combination lies further back, in the make-
up of a stem or form, and so is constant, or belongs to the word in all circumstances of its
occurrence: thus, kvà (from kúa), svàr (súar), nyàk (níak), budhnyà (budhnía), kanyā̀ (kaníā),
nadyàs (nadī́-as), tanvā̀ (tanū́-ā).
c. The words of both the above classes are in the Veda, in the great majority of cases, to
be read with restoration of the acute vowel as a separate syllable; thus, apsú antár, súar,
nadī́as, etc. In some texts, part of them are written correspondingly, thus, súvar, tanúvā,
budhníya.
d. Praçliṣṭa, when the acute and grave vowels are of such character that they are fused
into a long vowel or diphthong (128 c): thus, divī̀ ’va (RV. AV. etc.), from diví iva; sū̀dgātā
(TS.), from sú-udgātā; nāì ’vā̀ ’çnīyāt (ÇB.), from ná evá açnīyāt.
e. Abhinihita, when an initial grave a is absorbed by a final acute é or ó (135 a): thus, tè
’bruvan, from té abruvan; sò ’bravīt, from só abravīt.
85. But further, the Hindu grammarians agree in declaring the (naturally grave) syllable
following an acute, whether in the same or in another word, to be svarita or circumflex —
unless, indeed, it be itself followed by an acute or circumflex; in which case it retains its grave
tone. This is called by European scholars the enclitic or dependent circumflex.
a. Thus, in téna and té ca, the syllable na and word ca are regarded and marked as
circumflex; but in téna té and té ca svàr they are grave.
b. This seems to mean that the voice, which is borne up at the higher pitch to the end of
the acute syllable, does not ordinarily drop to grave pitch by an instantaneous movement, but
descends by a more or less perceptible slide in the course of the following syllable. No Hindu
authority suggests the theory of a middle or intermediate tone for the enclitic, any more than
for the independent circumflex. For the most part, the two are identified with one another, in
treatment and designation. The enclitic circumflex is likewise divided into a number of sub-
varieties, with different names: they are of too little consequence to be worth reporting.

86. The essential difference of the two kinds of circumflex is shown clearly enough by these
facts: 1. the independent circumflex takes the place of the acute as the proper accent of a
word, while the enclitic is the mere shadow following an acute, and following it in another
word precisely as in the same word; 2. the independent circumflex maintains its character in all
situations, while the enclitic before a following circumflex or acute loses its circumflex
character, and becomes grave; moreover, 3. in many of the systems of marking accent (below,
88), the two are quite differently indicated.
87. The accentuation is marked in manuscripts only of the older literature: namely, in the
primary Vedic texts, or saṁhitās, in two of the Brāhmaṇas (Tāittirīya and Çatapatha), in the
Tāittirīya-Āraṇyaka, in certain passages of the Āitareya-Āraṇyaka, and in the Suparṇādhyāya.
There are a number of methods of writing accent, more or less different from one another; the
one found in manuscripts of the Rig-Veda, which is most widely known, and of which most of
the others are only slight modifications, is as follows.
a. The acute syllable is left unmarked; the circumflex, whether independent or enclitic, has
a short perpendicular stroke above; and the grave next preceding an acute or (independent)
circumflex has a short horizontal stroke below. Thus,
अ॒िम् agním; जु॒होत juhóti; त॒ा॑ tanvā̀; व॑ kvà.
b. But the introductory grave stroke below cannot be given if an acute syllable is initial;
hence an unmarked syllable at the beginning of a word is to be understood as acute; and hence
also, if several grave syllables precede an acute at the beginning of a sentence, they must all
alike have the grave sign. Thus,
इ॑ः índraḥ; ते té; क॒िर॒स kariṣyási; तु॒िव॒ज॒ाता tuvijātā́.
c. All the grave syllables, however, which follow a marked circumflex are left unmarked,
until the occurrence of another accented syllable causes the one which precedes it to take the
preparatory stroke below. Thus,
सु॒शकसँक sudṛ́çīkasaṁdṛk;
but
सु॒शकसँ॒गवा॑म् sudṛ́çīkasaṁdṛg gávām.
d. If an independent circumflex be followed by an acute (or by another independent
circumflex), a figure 1 is set after the former circumflexed vowel if it be short, or a figure 3 if
it be long, and signs of accent are applied as in the following examples:
अ॒१◌॒ः apsv à1ntáḥ (from apsú antáḥ); र॒ाय॒ो३◌॒विनः rāyò3 vániḥ (from rāyó
avániḥ).

The rationale of this mode of designation is not well understood; the Prātiçākhyas give no
account of it. In the scholastic utterance of the syllable so designated is made a peculiar quaver
or roulade of the voice, called kampa or vikampana.
e. The accent-marks are written with red ink in the manuscripts, being added after the text
is written, and perhaps often by another hand.
88. a. Nearly accordant with this, the Rig-Veda method of designating accent, are the
methods employed in the manuscripts of the Atharva-Veda, of the Vājasaneyi-Saṁhitā, and of
the Tāittirīya-Saṁhitā, Brāhmaṇa, and Āraṇyaka. Their differences from it are of trifling
importance, consisting mainly in peculiar ways of marking the circumflex that precedes an
acute (87 d). In some manuscripts of the Atharva-Veda, the accent-marks are dots instead of
strokes, and that for the circumflex is made within the syllable instead of above it.
b. In most manuscripts of the Māitrāyaṇī-Saṁhitā, the acute syllable itself, besides its
surroundings, is marked — namely, by a perpendicular stroke above the syllable (like that of
the ordinary circumflex in the RV. method). The independent circumflex has a hook beneath the
syllable, and the circumflex before an acute (87 d) is denoted simply by a figure 3, standing
before instead of after the circumflexed syllable.
c. The Çatapatha-Brāhmaṇa uses only a single accent-sign, the horizontal stroke beneath the
syllable (like the mark for grave in RV.). This is put under an acute, or, if two or more acutes
immediately follow one another, only under the preceding syllable. To mark an independent
circumflex, it is put under the preceding syllable. The method is an imperfect one, allowing
many ambiguities.
d. The Sāma-Veda method is the most intricate of all. It has a dozen different signs,
consisting of figures, or of figures and letters combined, all placed above the syllables, and
varying according to both the accentual character of the syllable and to its surroundings. Its
origin is obscure; if anything more is indicated by it then by the other simpler systems, the
fact has not been demonstrated.
89. In this work, as everything given in the devanāgarī characters is also given in
transliteration, it will generally be unnecessary to mark the accent except in the transliterated
form; where, however, the case is otherwise, there will be adopted the method of marking only
the really accented syllables, the acute and the independent circumflex: the latter by the
usually svarita-sign, the former by a small u (for udātta) above the syllable: thus,
 índra, 
 ágne, ॑ svàr, न॑स nadyàs.
a. These being given, everything else which the Hindu theory recognizes as dependent on
and accompanying them can readily be understood as implied.

90. The theory of the Sanskrit accent, as here given (a consistent and intelligible body of
phenomena), has been overlaid by the Hindu theorists, especially of the Prātiçākhyas, with a
number of added features, of a much more questionable character. Thus:
a. The unmarked grave syllables following a circumflex (either at the end of a sentence, or
till the near aproach of another acute) are declared to have the same high tone with the (also
unmarked) acute. They are called pracaya or pracita (accumulated: because liable to occur in
an indefinite series of successive syllables).
b. The circumflex, whether independent or enclitic, is declared to begin on a higher pitch
than acute, and to descend to acute pitch in ordinary cases: the concluding instant of it being
brought down to grave pitch, however, in the case of an independent circumflex which is
immediately followed by another ascent of the voice to higher pitch, in acute or independent
circumflex (a kampa syllable: 87 d).
c. Pāṇini gives the ambiguous name of ekaçruti ( monotone) to the pracita syllables, and says
nothing of the uplifting of the circumflex to a higher plane; he teaches, however, a depression
below the grave pitch for the marked grave syllable before acute or circumflex, calling it
sannatara (otherwise anudāttatara).
91. The system of accentuation as marked in the Vedic texts appears to have assumed in
the traditional recitation of the Brahmanic schools a peculiar and artificial form, in which the
designated syllables, grave and circumflex (equally the enclitic and the independent circumflex),
have acquired a conspicuous value, while the undesignated, the acute, has sunk into
insignificance.
92. The Sanskrit accent taught in the native grammars and represented by the accentuated
texts is essentially a system of word-accent only. No general attempt is made (any more than in
the Greek system) to define or mark a sentence-accent, the effect of the emphasis and
modulation of the sentence in modifying the independent accent of individual words. The only
approach to it is seen in the treatment of vocatives and personal verb-forms.
a. A vocative is usually without accent except at the beginning of a sentence: for further
details, see 314.
b. A personal verb-form is usually accentless in an independent-clause, except when standing
at the beginning of the clause: for further details, see 591 ff.
93. Certain other words also are, usually or always, without accent.
a. The particles ca, vā, u, sma, iva, cid, svid, ha, and the Vedic kam (or kám), gha, bhala,
samaha, īm, sīm, are always without accent; also yathā in RV. (sometimes also elsewhere) in
the sense of iva, at the end of a pāda or verse-division.

b. The same is true of certain pronouns and pronominal stems: mā, me, nāu, nas, tvā, te,
vām, vas (491 b), ena (500), tva (503 b), sama (513 c).
c. The cases of the pronominal stem a are sometimes accented and sometimes accentless
(502).
d. An accentless word is not allowed to stand at the beginning of a sentence; also not of a
pāda or primary division of a verse; a pāda is, in all matters relating to accentuation, treated
like an independent sentence.
94. Some words have more than a single accented syllable. Such are:
a. Certain dual copulative compounds in the Veda (see 1255), as mitrā́váruṇā, dyā́vāpṛthivī́.
Also, a few other Vedic compounds (see 1267 d), as bṛ́haspáti, tánūnápāt.
b. In a few cases, the further compounds and derivatives of such compounds, as
dyā́vāpṛthivī́vant, bṛ́haspátipraṇutta.
c. Infinitive datives in tavāí (see 972 a), as étavāí, ápabhartavāí.
d. A word naturally barytone, but having its final syllable protracted (see 78 a).
e. The particle vā́vá (in the Brāhmaṇas).
95. On the place of the accented syllable in a Sanskrit word there is no restriction whatever
depending upon either the number or the quantity of the preceding or following syllables. The
accent rests where the rules of inflection or derivation or composition place it, without regard
to any thing else.
a. Thus, índre, agnāú, índreṇa, agnínā, agninā́m, bāhúcyuta, ánapacyuta, parjányajinvita,
abhimātiṣāhá, ánabhimlātavarṇa, abhiçasticā́tana, híraṇyavāçīmattama, cátuçcatvāriṅçadakṣara.
96. Since the accent is marked only in the older literature, and the statements of the
grammarians, with the deduced rules of accentuation, are far from being sufficient to settle in
all cases, the place of the stress of voice for a considerable part of the vocabulary is
undetermined. Hence it is a general habit with European scholars to pronounce Sanskrit words
according to the rules of the Latin accent.

97. In this work, the accent of each word and form will in general be marked, so far as
there is authority determining its place and character. Where specific words and forms are
quoted, they will only be so far accentuated as they are found with accent in accentuated texts.
CHAPTER III.
RULES OF EUPHONIC COMBINATION.
Introductory.
98. The words in Sanskrit, as in the other languages related with it, are in great part
analysable into roots, suffixes of derivation, and endings of inflection, these last being added
mostly to stems containing suffixes, but also sometimes directly to roots.
a. There are, of course, a certain number of uninflected words—indeclinables, particles; and
also not a few that are incapable of analysis.
99. The Sanskrit, indeed, possesses an exceptionally analysable character; its formative
processes are more regular and transparent than those of any other Indo-European tongue.
Hence the prevailing method of the Hindu native science of grammar, which sets up a certain
body of roots, and prescribes the processes by which these may be made stems and words,
giving the various added elements, and laying down the rules by which their combination is
effected. And the same general method is, for like reasons, followed also by European
grammarians.
100. The euphonic-laws, accordingly, which govern the combination of suffix or of ending
with root or stem, possess a high practical importance, and require to be laid down in
preparation for topics of declension and conjugation.
101. Moreover, the formation of compounds, by joining two or more simple stems, is
extremely frequent in Sanskrit; and this kind of combination has its own peculiar euphonic
rules. And once more, in the form of the language as handed down to us by its literature, the
words composing a sentence or paragraph are adapted to and combined with one another by
nearly the same rules which govern the making of compounds; so that it is impossible to take
apart and understand a Sanskrit sentence without knowing those rules. Hence

an increased degree of practical importance belonging to the subject of euphonic combination.
a. This euphonic interdependence of the words of a sentence is unknown to any other
language in anything like the same degree; and it cannot but be suspected of being at least in
part artificial, implying an erection into necessary and invariable rules of what in the living
language were only optional practices. This is strongly indicated, indeed, by the evidence of the
older dialect of the Vedas and of the derived Prakritic dialects, in both of which some of the
rules (especially that as to the hiatus: see 113) are often violated.
102. The roots which are authenticated by their occurrence in the literary monuments of the
language, earlier and later, number between eight and nine hundred. About half of these belong
fully to the language throughout its whole history; some (about a hundred and fifty) are limited
to the earlier or pre-classical period; some, again (over a hundred and twenty), make their first
appearance in the later language.
a. There are in this number roots of very diverse character. Those occurring only later are,
at least in great part, presumably of secondary origin; and a certain number are even doubtless
artificial, used once or twice because found in the root-lists of the Hindu grammarians (103).
But also of the rest, some are plainly secondary, while others are questionable; and not a few
are variations or differentiated forms of one another. Thus, there are roots showing respectively
r and l, as rabh and labh, mruc and mluc, kṣar and kṣal; roots with and without a
strengthening nasal, as vand and vad, mand and mad; roots in ā and in a nasal, as khā and
khan, gā and gam, jā and jan; roots made by an added ā, as trā from tṛ, mnā from man, psā
from bhas, yā from i; roots the product of reduplication, as jakṣ from ghas, dudh from dhū;
roots with a final sibilant of formative origin, as bhakṣ and bhikṣ from bhaj, nakṣ from naç,
çruṣ from çru, hās from hā; root-forms held apart by a well-established discordance of inflection
and meaning, which yet are probably different sides of one root, as kṛṣ drag and kṛṣ plough',
vid know and vid find, vṛ enclose and vṛ choose; and so on. In many such cases it is doubtful
whether we ought to acknowledge two roots or only one; and no absolute rule of distinction
can be laid down and maintained.
103. The list of roots given by the Hindu grammarians contains about two thousand roots,
without including all those which students of the language are compelled to recognize.
Considerably more than half of this number, then, are unauthenticated by use; and although
some of these may yet come to light, or may have existed without finding their way into any of
the preserved literary documents, it is certain that most are fictitious; made in part for the
explanation of words falsely described as their derivatives, but in the main for unknown and
perhaps undiscoverable reasons.

a. The roots unauthenticated by traceable use will be made no account of in this grammar—
or, if noticed, will be specified as of that character.
104. The forms of the roots as here used will be found to differ in certain respects from
those given by the native grammarians and adopted by some European works. Thus:
a. Those roots of which the initial n and s are regularly converted to ṇ and ṣ after certain
prefixes are by the Hindu grammarians given as beginning with ṇ and ṣ; no western authority
follows this example.
b. The Hindus classify as simple roots a number of derived stems: reduplicated ones, as
dīdhī, jāgṛ, daridrā; present-stems, as ūrṇu; and denominative stems, as avadhīr, kumār, sabhāg,
mantr, sāntv, arth, and the like. These are in European works generally reduced to their true
value.
c. A number of roots ending in an ā which is irregularly treated in the present-system are
written in the Hindu lists with diphthongs — e or āi or o; here they will be regarded as ā-roots
(see 251). The o of such root-forms, especially, is purely arbitrary; no forms or derivatives
made from the roots justify it.
d. The roots showing interchangeably ṛ and ir and īr or ur and ūr (242) are written by the
Hindus with ṛ or with ṝ, or with both. The ṝ here also is only formal, intended to mark the
roots as liable to certain modifications, since it nowhere shows itself in any form or derivative.
Such roots will in this work be written with ṛ.
e. The roots, on the other hand, showing a variation between ṛ and ar (rarely ra) as weak
and strong forms will be here written with ṛ, as by the native grammarians, although many
European authorities prefer the other or strong form. So long as we write the unstrengthened
vowel in vid and çī, in mud and bhū, and their like, consistency seems to be require that we
write it in sṛj and kṛ also—in all cases alike, without reference to what may have been the
more original Indo-European form.
105. In many cases of roots showing more than one form, the selection of a representative
form is a matter of comparative indifference. To deal with such cases according to their
historical character is the part rather of an Indo-European comparative grammar than of a
Sanskrit grammar. We must be content to accept as roots what elements seem to have on the
whole that value in the existing condition of the language.
106. Stems as well as roots have their variations of form (311). The Hindu grammarians
usually give the weaker form as the normal one, and derive the other from it by a
strengthening change; some European authorities do the same, while others prefer the contrary
method; the choice is of unessential consequence, and may be determined in any case by
motives of convenience.
107. We shall accordingly consider first of all, in the present chapter, the euphonic
principles and laws which govern the combi-

nation of the elements of words and of words as elements of the sentence; then will be taken
up the subject of inflection, under the two heads of declension and conjugation; and an account
of the classes of uninflected words will follow.
a. The formation of conjugational stems (tense and mode-stems; also participles and
infinitive) will be taught, as is usual, in connection with the processes of conjugational
inflection; that of uninflected words, in connection with the various classes of those words. But
the general subject of derivation, or the formation of declinable stems, will be taken up by itself
later (chap. XVII.); and it will be followed by an account of the formation of compound stems
(chap. XVIII.).
108. It is by no means to be expected of beginners in the language that they will attempt
to master the rules of euphonic combination in a body, before going on to learn the paradigms
of inflection. On the contrary, the leading paradigms of declension may best be learned
outright, without attention, or with only a minimum of attention, to euphonic rule. In taking up
conjugation, however, it is practically, as well as theoretically, better to learn the forms as
combinations of stem and ending, with attention to such laws of combination as apply in the
particular cases concerned. The rules of external combination, governing the make-up of the
sentence out of words, should be grappled with only when the student is prepared to begin the
reading or the formation of sentences.
Principles of Euphonic Combination.
109. The rules of combination (saṁdhi 'putting together ) are in some respects different,
according as they apply—
a. to the internal make-up of a word, by the addition of derivative and inflectional endings
to roots and stems;
b. to the more external putting together of stems to make compound stems, and the yet
looser and more accidental collocation of words in the sentence;
c. Hence they are usually divided into rules of internal combination, and rules of external
combination.

110. In both classes of cases, however, the general principles of combination are the same—
and likewise, to a great extent, the specific rules. The differences depend in part on the
occurrence or non-occurrence of certain combinations in the one class or the other; in part, on
the difference of treatment of the same sound as final of a root or of an ending, the former
being more persistent than the latter; in part, on the occurrence in external combination of
certain changes which are apparently phonetic but really historical; and, most frequent and
conspicuous of all, on the fact that (157) vowels and semivowels and nasals exercise a
sonantizing influence in external combination, but not in internal. Hence, to avoid unnecessary
repetition as well as the separation of what really belongs together, the rules for both kinds of
combination are given below in connection with one another.
111. a. Moreover, before case-endings beginning with bh and s (namely bhyām, bhis, bhyas,
su), the treatment of the finals of stems is in general the same as in the combinations of words
(pada) with one another—whence those endings are sometimes called pada-endings, and the
cases they form are known as pada-cases.
b. The importance of this distinction in somewhat exaggerated by the ordinary statement of
it. In fact, dh is the only sonant mute initial of an ending occurring in conjugation, as bh in
declension; and the difference of their treatment is in part owing to the one coming into
collision usually with the final of a root and the other of an ending, and in part to the fact that
dh, as a dental, is more assimilable to palatals and linguals than bh. A more marked and
problematic distinction is made between su and the verbal endings si, sva, etc., especially after
palatal sounds and ṣ.
c. Further, before certain of the suffixes of derivation the final of a stem is sometimes
treated in the same manner as that of a word in composition.
d. This is especially the case before secondary suffixes having a markedly distinct office,
like the possessive mant and vant, the abstract-making tva, the suffix of material maya, and so
on; and it is much more frequent in the later language than in the earlier. The examples are
sporadic in character, and no rule can be given to cover them: for details, see the various
suffixes, in chap. XVII. In the RV. (as may be mentioned here) the only examples are
vidyúnmant (beside garútmant, kakúdmant, etc.), pṛ́ṣadvant (beside datvánt, marútvant, etc.),
dhṛṣadvín (beside namasvín etc.), and ahaṁyú, kiṁyú, çaṁyú, and aṅhoyú, duvoyú, áskṛdhoyu
(beside namasyú, vacasyú, etc.); and the AV. adds only sáhovan (RV. savā́van).
112. The leading rules of internal combination (as already stated: 108) are those which are
of most immediate importance to a beginner in the language, since his first task is to master
the principle paradigms of

inflection; the rules of external combination may better be left untouched until he comes to
dealing with words in sentences, or to translating. Then, however, they are indispensable, since
the proper form of the words that compose the sentence is not to be determined without them.
a. The general principles of combination underlying the euphonic rules, and determining
their classification, may be stated as follows:
113. Hiatus. In general, hiatus is forbidden; every syllable except the initial one of a
sentence, or of a word or phrase not forming part of a sentence, must begin with a consonant
(or with more than one).
a. For details, and for exceptions, see 125 ff.
b. In the earlier language, however, hiatus in every position was abundantly admitted. This
appears plainly from the mantras, or metrical parts of the Veda, where in innumerable
instances y and v are to be read as i and u, and, less often, a long vowel is to be resolved into
two vowels, in order to make good the metre; e.g. vāryāṇām has to be read as vā-ri-ā-ṇa-ām,
svaçvyam as su-aç-vi-am, and so on. In the Brāhmaṇas, also, we find tvac, svar, dyāus described
as dissyllables, vyāna and satyam as trisyllables, rājanya as of four syllables, and the like. See
further 129 e.
114. Deaspiration. An aspirate mute is liable to lose its aspiration, being allowed to stand
unchanged only before a vowel or semivowel or nasal.
115. Assimilation. The great body of euphonic changes in Sanskrit, as elsewhere, falls under
the general head of assimilation—which takes place both between sounds which are so nearly
alike that the difference between them is too insignificant to be worth preserving, and between
those which are so diverse as to be practically incompatible.
116. In part, assimilation involves the conversion of one sound to another of the same
series, without change of articulating position; in part, it involves a change of position, or
transfer to another series.
117. Of changes within the series, the most frequent and important occur in the adaptation
of surd and sonant sounds to one

another; but the nasals and l have also in certain cases their special assimilative influence.
Thus:
a. In the two classes of non-nasal mutes and spirants, surd and sonant are wholly
incompatible; no surd of either class can either precede or follow a sonant of either.
b. A mute, surd or sonant, is assimilated by being changed to its correspondent of the other
kind; of the spirants, the surd s is the only one having a sonant correspondent, namely r, to
which it is convertible in external combination (164 ff.).
c. The nasals are more freely combinable: a nasal may either precede or follow a mute of
either kind, or the sonant spirant h; it may also follow a surd aspirant (sibilant); no nasal,
however, ever precedes a sibilant in the interior of a word (it is changed instead to anusvāra);
and in external combination their concurrence is usually avoided by insertion of a surd mute.
d. A semivowel has still less sonantizing influence; and a vowel least of all: both are freely
preceded and followed by sounds of every other class, in the interior of a word.
e. Before a sibilant, however, is found, of the semivowels, only r and very rarely l.
Moreover, in external combination, r is often changed to its surd correspondent s.
But
f. In composition and sentence-collocation, initial vowels and semivowels and nasals also
require the preceding final to be sonant. And
g. Before a nasal and l, the assimilative process is sometimes carried further, by the
conversion of a final mute to a nasal or l respectively.
118. Of conversions involving a change of articulate position, the most important are those
of dental sounds to lingual, and, less often, to palatal. Thus:
a. The dental s and n are very frequently converted to ṣ and ṇ by the assimilating influence
of contiguous or neighboring lingual sounds: the s, even by sounds—namely, i- and u-vowels
and k—which have themselves no lingual character.
b. A non-nasal dental mute is (with a few exceptions in external combination) made lingual
when it comes into collision with a lingual sound.
c. The dental mutes and sibilant are made palatal by a contiguous palatal.
But also:
d. A m (not radical) is assimilated to a following consonant, of whatever kind.
e. For certain anomalous cases, see 151.
119. The euphonic combinations of the palatal mutes, the palatal sibilant, and the
aspiration, as being sounds derived by phonetic alteration from more original gutturals (42 ff.),
are made peculiar

and complicated by two circumstances: their reversion to a guttural form (or the appearance of
the unaltered guttural instead of them: 43); and the different treatment of j and h according as
they represent one or another degree of alteration—the one tending, like c, more to the guttural
reversion, the other showing, like ç, a more sibilant and lingual character.
120. The lingual sibilant ṣ, also of derivative character (from dental s), shows as radical
final peculiar and problematic phenomena of combination.
121. Extension and abbreviation of consonant-groups. The native grammarians allow or
require certain extensions, by duplication or insertion, of groups of consonants. And, on the
other hand, abbreviation of certain other groups is allowed, and found often practised in the
manuscripts.
122. Permitted Finals. The permitted occurrence of consonants at the end of a word is quite
narrowly restricted. In general, only one consonant is allowed after the last vowel; and that
must be neither the aspiration, nor a sibilant, nor a semivowel (save rarely ल् l), nor an aspirate
mute, nor a sonant mute if not nasal, nor a palatal.
123. Increment and Decrement. Besides these more or less regular changes accompanying
the combination of the parts that make up words, there is another class of a different
character, not consisting in the mutual adaptations of the parts, but in strengthening or
weakening changes of the parts themselves.
124. It is impossible to carry through a perfectly systematic arrangement of the detailed
rules of euphonic combination, because the different varieties of euphonic change more or less
overlap and intersect one another. The order observed below will be as follows:
1. Rules of vowel combination, for the avoidance of hiatus.
2. Rules as to permitted finals (since these underlie the further treatment of final
consonants in external combination).
3. Rules for loss of aspiration of an aspirate mute.
4. Rules of surd and sonant assimilation, including those for final s and r.

5. Rules for the conversion of dental sounds to lingual and palatal.
6. Rules for the changes of final nasals, including those in which a former final following the
nasal re-appears in combination.
7. Rules regarding the special changes of the derivation sounds—the palatal mutes and
sibilant, the aspiration, and the lingual sibilant.
8. Rules as to extension and abbreviation of consonant groups.
9. Rules for strengthening and weakening processes.
Everywhere, rules for more sporadic and less classifiable cases will be given in the most
practically convenient connection; and the Index will render what help is needed toward finding
them.
Rules of Vowel Combination.
125. The concurrence of two vowels, or of vowel and diphthong, without intervening
consonant, is forbidden by the euphony of the later or classical language. It is avoided,
according to the circumstances of the case, either by fusion of the two concurrent sounds into
one, by the reduction of one of them to a semivowel, or by development of a semivowel
between them.
a. For the not infrequent cases of composition and sentence-combination in which the recent
loss of a s or y or v between vowels leave a permanent hiatus, see below, 132 ff., 175–7; for
certain final vowels which are maintained unchanged in sentence-combination before an initial
vowel, see 138.
b. A very few words in their admitted written form show interior hiatus; such are títaü
sieve (perhaps for titasu, BR.), práüga wagon-pole (for prayuga); and, in RV., suūtí.
c. The texts of the older dialect are written according to the euphonic rules of the later
language, although in them (see 113 b) the hiatus is really of frequent occurrence. Hence they
are not to be read as written, but with constantly recurring reversal of the processes of vowel-
combination which they have been made artificially to undergo. See further 129 e.
d. Also in the later language, hiatus between the two pādas or primary divisions of a
metrical line is tolerably frequent, and it is not unknown in sporadic cases even in the interior
of a pāda.
e. The rules of vowel combination, as regards both the resulting sound and its accent, are
nearly the same in internal and in extreme saṁdhi.

126. Two similar simple vowels, short or long, coalesce and form the corresponding long
vowel: thus, two a-vowels (either or both of them short or long) form आ ā; two i-vowels, ई ī;
two u-vowels, ऊ ū; and theoretically, two ṛ-vowels form ॠ ṝ, but it is questionable whether the
case ever practically occurs. Examples are:
स चाजः sa cā ’prajaḥ (ca + aprajaḥ);
अतीव atī ’va (ati + iva);
सूम् sūktam (su-uktam);
राजासीत् rājā ”sīt (rājā + āsīt);
अधीरः adhīçvaraḥ (adhi-īçvaraḥ);
जुपभृत् juhūpabhṛt (juhū—upabhṛt).
a. As the above examples indicate, it will be the practice everywhere in this work, in
transliteration (not in the devanāgarī text), to separate independent words; and if an initial
vowel of a following word has coalesced with a final of the preceding, this will be indicated by
an apostrophe—single if the initial vowel be the shorter, double if it be the longer, of the two
different initials which in every case of combination yield the same result.
127. An a-vowel combines with a following i-vowel to ए e; with an u-vowel, to ओ o; with ऋ
ṛ, to अ ar; with ऌ ḷ (theoretically), to अल् al; with ए e or ऐ āi, to ऐ āi; with ओ o or औ āu, to औ
āu. Examples are:
राजे rājendra (rāja-indra);
िहतोपदेशः hitopadeçaḥ (hita-upadeçaḥ);
महषः maharṣiḥ (mahā-ṛṣiḥ);
सैव sāi ’va (sā + eva);
राजैयम् rājāiçvaryam (rājā-āiçvaryam);
िदवौकसः divāukasaḥ (divā-okasaḥ);
रौषधम् jvarāuṣadham (jvara-āuṣadham).
a. In the Vedic texts, the vowel ṛ is ordinarily written unchanged after the a-vowel, which, if
long, is shortened: thus, mahaṛṣiḥ instead of maharṣiḥ. The two vowels, however, are usually
pronounced as one syllable.
b. When successive words like indra ā ihi are to be combined, the first combination, to
indrā, is made first, and the result is indre” ’hi (not indrāi” ’hi, from indra e ’hi).

128. As regards the accent of these vowel combinations, it is to be noticed that, 1. as a
matter of course, the union of acute with acute yields acute, and that of grave with grave
yields grave; that of circumflex with circumflex cannot occur; 2. a circumflex with following
acute yields acute, the final grave element of the former being raised to acute pitch; a grave
with following acute does the same, as no upward slide of the voice on a syllable is
acknowledged in the language; but, 3. when the former of the fused elements is acute and the
latter grave, we might expect the resulting syllable to be in general circumflex, to represent
both the original tones. Pāṇini in fact allows this accent in every such case; and in a single
accented Brāhmaṇa text (ÇB.), the circumflex is regularly written. But the language shows, on
the whole, an indisposition to allow the circumflex to rest on either long vowel or diphthong as
its sole basis, and the acute element is suffered to raise the other to its own level of pitch,
making the whole syllable acute. The only exception to this, in most of the texts, is the
combination of í and i, which becomes ī̀: thus, divī̀ ’va, from diví iva; in the Tāittirīya texts
alone such a case follows the general rule, while ú and u, instead, make ū̀: thus, sū̀dgātā from
sú-udgātā.
129. The i-vowels, the u-vowels, and ऋ ṛ, before a dissimilar vowel or diphthong, are
regularly converted each into its own corresponding semivowel, य् y or व् v or  r. Examples
are:
इाह ity āha (iti + āha);
मिव madhv iva (madhu + iva);
िहथ duhitrarthe (duhitṛ-arthe);
 stry asya (strī + asya);
वै vadhvāi (vadhū-āi).
a. But in internal combination the i and u-vowels are not seldom changed instead to iy and
uv—and this especially in monosyllables, or after two constants, where otherwise a group of
consonants difficult of pronunciation would be the result. The cases will be noticed below, in
explaining inflected forms.
b. A radical i-vowel is converted into y even before i in perfect tense-inflection, so ninyima
(ninī + ima).
c. In a few sporadic cases, i and u become iy and uv even in word-composition: e.g., triyavi
(tri + avi), viyan̄ga (vi + an̄ga), suvita (su + ita): compare 1204 b, c.
d. Not very seldom, the same word (especially as found in different texts of the older
language) has more than one form, showing various treat-

ment of an i or u-vowel: e.g. svàr or súvar, tanvè or tanúve, budhnyà or budhníya, rā́tryāi or
rā́triyāi. For the most part, doubtless, these are only two ways of writing the same
pronunciation, sú-ar, budhnía, and so on; and the discordance has no other importance,
historical or phonetic. There is more or less of this difference of treatment of an i- or u-element
after a consonant in all periods of the language.
e. In the elder language, there is a marked difference, in respect to the frequency of vowel-
combination for avoiding hiatus as compared with that of non-combination and consequent
hiatus, between the class of cases where two vowel-sounds, similar or dissimilar, would coalesce
into one (126, 127) and that where an i- or u-vowel would be converted into a semivowel. Thus,
in word-composition, the ratio of the cases of coalesced vowels to those of hiatus are in RV. as
five to one, in AV. as nineteen to one, while in the cases of semivowel-conversion are in RV.
only one in twelve, in AV. only one in five; in sentence-combination, the cases of coalescence
are in both RV. and AV. about as seven to one, while those of semivowel-conversion are in RV.
only one in fifty, in AV. one in five.
f. For certain cases of the loss or assimilation of i and u before y and v respectively, see
233 a.
130. As regards the accent—here, as in the preceding case (128), the only combination
requiring notice is that of an acute i- or u- vowel with a following grave: the result is
circumflex; and such cases of circumflex are many times more frequent than any and all others.
Examples are:
ु॑ित vyùṣṭi (ví-uṣṭi); अ॑चित abhyàrcati;
न nadyāù (nadí-āu);
 svìṣṭa (sú-iṣṭa); त॑स् tanvàs (tanū́-as).
a. Of a similar combination of acute ṛ́ with following grave, only a single case has been
noted in accented texts: namely, vijñātr ètát (i.e. vijñātṛ́ etát: ÇB. xiv. 6. 811); the accentuation
is in accordance with the rules for i and u.
131. Of a diphthong, the final i- or u-element is changed to its corresponding semivowel, य् y
and व् v, before any vowel or diphthong: thus, ए e (really ai: 28 a) becomes अय् ay, and ओ o
(that is, au: 28 a) becomes अव् av; ऐ āi becomes आय् āy, and औ āu becomes आव् āv.
a. No change of accent, of course, occurs here; each original syllable retains its syllabic
identity, and hence also its own tone.
b. Examples can be given only for internal combination, since in external combination there
are further changes: see the next paragraph. Thus,
नय naya (ne-a); नाय nāya (nāi-a);
भब bhava (bho-a); भाब bhāva (bhāu-a).

132. In external combination, we have the important additional rule that the semivowel
resulting from the conversion of the final element of a diphthong is in general dropped; and the
resulting hiatus is left without further change.
133. That is to say, a final ए e (the most frequent case) becomes simply अ a before an initial
vowel (except अ a: see 135, below), and both then remain unchanged; and a final ऐ āi, in like
manner, becomes (everywhere) आ ā. Thus,
त आगताः ta āgatāḥ (te + āgatāḥ);
नगर इह nagara iha (nagare + iha);
ता अददात् tasmā adadāt (tasmāi + adadāt);
िया उम् striyā uktam (striyāi + uktam).
a. The latter grammarians allow the y in such combinations to be either retained or
dropped; but the uniform practice of the manuscripts, of every age, in accordance with the
strict requirement of the Vedic grammars (Prātiçākhyas), is to omit the semivowel and leave the
hiatus.
b. The persistence of the hiatus caused by this omission is a plain indication of the
comparatively recent loss of the intervening consonantal sound.
c. Instances, however, of the avoidance of hiatus by combination of the remaining final
vowel with the following initial according to the usual rules are met with in every period of the
language, from the RV. down; but they are rare and of sporadic character. Compare the similar
treatments of the hiatus after a lost final s, 176–7.
d. For the peculiar treatment of this combination in certain cases caused by the MS., see
below, 176d.
134. a. The diphthong o (except as phonetic alteration of final as: see 175 a) is an unusual
final, appearing only in the stem go (361 c), in the voc. sing. of u-stems (341), in words of
which the final a is combined with the particle u, as atho, and in a few interjections. In the last
two classes it is uncombinable (below, 138 c,f); the vocatives sometimes retain the v and
sometimes lose it (the practices of different texts are too different to be briefly stated); go (in
composition only) does not ordinarily lose its final element, but remains gav or go. A final as
becomes a, with following hiatus, before any vowel save a (for which, see the next paragraph).

b. The ब् v of आब् āv from औ āu is usually retained: thus,
तावेव tāv eva (tāu + eva);
उभािवाी ubhāv indrāgnī (ubhāu + indrāgnī).
c. In the older language, however, it is in some texts dropped before an u-vowel: thus, tā́
ubhāú; in other texts it is treated like āi, or loses its u-element before every initial vowel: thus,
tā́ evá, ubhā́ indrāgnī́.
135. After final ए e or ओ o, an initial अ a disappears.
a. The resulting accent is as if the a were not dropped, but rather absorbed into the
preceding diphthong, having its tone duly represented in the combination. If, namely, the e or o
is grave or circumflex and the a acute, the former becomes acute; if the e or o is acute and
the a grave, the former becomes circumflex, as usually in the fusion of an acute a and a grave
element. If both are acute or both grave, no change, of course, is seen in the result. Examples
are:
ते ऽुवन् tè ‘bruvan (té abruvan);
सो ऽवीत् sò ‘bravīt (sáḥ abravīt);
हिसतो ऽिः hiṅsitavyò ‘gníḥ (hiṅsitavyàḥ agníḥ);
यिदो ऽवीत् yád índró ‘bravīt (yád índraḥ ábravīt);
याो ऽवीत् yád rājanyó ‘bravīt (yád rājanàḥ ábravīt).
b. As to the use of the avagraha sign in the case of such an elision, see above, 16. In
transliteration, the reversed apostrophe, or rough breathing, will be used in this work to
represent it.
c. This elision or absorption of initial a after final e or o, which in the later language is the
invariable rule, is in the Veda only an occasional occurrence. Thus, in the RV., out of nearly
4500 instances of such an initial a, it is, as the metre shows, to be really omitted only about
seventy times; in the AV., less than 300 times out of about 1600. In neither work is there any
accordance in respect to the combination in question between the written and the spoken form
of the text: in RV., the a is (as written) elided in more than three quarters of the cases; in the
AV., in about two thirds; and in both it is written in a number of instances where the metre
requires its omission.
d. In a few cases, an initial ā is thus elided, especially that of ātman.
e. To the rules of vowel combination, as above stated, there are certain exceptions. Some of
the more isolated of these will be

noticed where they come up in the processes of inflection etc.; a few require mention here.
13. In internal combination:
a. The augment a makes with the initial vowel of a root the combinations āi, āu, ār (vṛddhi-
vowels: 235), instead of e, o, ar (guṇa-vowels), as required by 127; thus, āita (a + ita), āubhnāt
(a + ubhnāt), ārdhnot (a + ṛdhnot).
b. The final o of a stem (1203a) becomes av before the suffix ya (original ia: 1210a).
c. The final vowel of a stem is often dropped when a secondary suffix is added (1203a).
d. For the weakening and loss of radical vowels, and for certain insertions, see below, 249
ff., 257–8.
137. In external combination:
a. The final a or ā of a preposition, with initial ṛ of a root, makes ār instead of ar: Thus,
ārchati (ā + ṛchati), avārchati (ava + ṛchati), upārṣati (ÇB.: upa + ṛṣati; but A.V. uparṣanti).
b. Instances are occasionally met with a final a or ā being lost entirely before initial e or o:
thus, in verb-forms, av’ eṣyāmas AB., up’ eṣatu etc. AV.; in derivatives, as upetavya, upetṛ; in
compounds, as daçoni, yathetam, and (permissibly) compounds with oṣṭha (not rare), otu (not
quotable), odana, as adharoṣṭha or adharāuṣṭha, tilodana or tilāudana; and even in sentence-
combination, as iv’ etayas, açvin’ eva, yath’ ociṣe (all RV.), tv’ odman B.; and always with the
exclamation om or oṁkára.
c. The form ūh from √vah sometimes makes the heavier or vṛddhi (235) diphthongal
combination with a preceding a-vowel; thus, prāuḍhi, akṣāuhiṇī (from pra + ūḍhi, etc.).
138. Certain final vowels, moreover, are uncombinable (pragṛhya), or maintain themselves
unchanged before any following vowel. Thus,
a. The vowels ī, ū, and e are dual endings, both of declensional and of conjugational forms.
Thus, bandhū āsāte imāu; girī ārohatam.
b. The pronoun amī (nom. pl.: 501); and the Vedic pronominal forms asmé, yuṣmé, tvé (492
a).
c. A final o made by combination of a final a-vowel with the particle u (1122b); thus, atho,
mo, no.
d. A final ī of a Vedic locative case from an i-stem (336f).
e. A protracted final vowel (78).
f. The final, or only, vowel of an interjection, as aho, he, ā, i, u.
g. The older language shows occasional exceptions to these rules: thus, a dual ī combined
with a following i, as nṛpátī ’va; an a elided after o, as átho ‘si; a locative ī turned into a
semivowel, as védy asyā́m.

Permitted Finals.
139. The sounds allowed to occur as finals in Sanskrit words standing by themselves (not in
euphonic combination with something following) are closely limited, and those which would
etymologically come to occupy such a position are often variously altered, in general accordance
with their treatment in other circumstances, or are sometimes omitted altogether.
a. The variety of consonants that would ever come at the end of either an inflected form or
a derivation stem in the language is very small: namely, in forms, only t (or d), n, m, s; in
derivative stems, only t, d, n, r, s (and, in a few rare words, j). But almost all consonants occur
as finals of roots; and every root is liable to be found, alone or as last member of a compound,
in the character of a declined stem.
140. All the vowel sounds, both simple and diphthongal, may be sounded at the end of a
word.
a. But neither ṝ nor ḷ ever actually occurs; and ṛ is rare (only as neuter sing. of a stem in ṛ
or ar, or as final of such a stem in composition).
Thus, índra, çiváyā, ákāri, nadī́, dā́tu, camū́, janayitṛ́, ágne, çivā́yāi, vā́yo, agnāú.
141. Of the non-nasal mutes, only the first in each series, the non-aspirate surd, is allowed;
the others — surd aspirate, and both sonants — whenever they would etymologically occur, are
converted into this.
Thus, agnimát for agnimáth, suhṛ́t for suhṛ́d, vīrút for vīrúdh, triṣṭúp for triṣṭúbh.
a. In a few roots, when their final (sonant aspirate) thus loses its aspiration, the original
sonant aspiration of the initial reappears; compare  h, below, 147.
Thus, dagh becomes dhak, budh becomes bhut, and so on.
The roots exhibiting this change are stated below, 155.
b. There was some question among the Hindu grammarians as whether the final mute is to
be estimated as of surd or of sonant quality; but the great weight of authority, and the
invariable practice of the manuscripts, favor the surd.

142. The palatals, however, form here (as often elsewhere) an exception to the rules for the
other mutes. No palatal is allowed as final. The च् c reverts (43) to its original क k: thus, वाक
vā́k, अंहोमुक aṅhomúk. The छ ch (only quotable in the root छ prach) becomes ट ṭ: thus ाट prāṭ.
The ज् j either reverts to its original guttural or becomes ट ṭ, in accordance with its treatment
in other combinations (219): thus, िभषक bhiṣák, िवराट virā́ṭ. The  jh does not occur, but it is by
the native grammarians declared convertible to ट ṭ.
143. Of the nasals, the म् m and न् n are extremely common, especially the former (म् m and
स् s are of all final consonants the most frequent); the ण् ṇ is allowed, but is quite rare; ङ n̄ is
found (remaining after the loss of a following क k) in a very small number of words (386 b, c,
407 a); ञ् ñ never occurs.
a. But the final m of a root is changed to n (compare 212 a, below): thus, akran from kram,
ágan, ajagan, aganīgan from gam, ánān from nam, ayān from yam, praçān from çam; no other
cases are quotable.
144. Of the semivowels, the ल् l alone is an admitted final, and it is very rare.  r is (like
its nearest surd correspondent, स् s: 145) changed as final to visarga. Of य् y and व् v there is
no occurrence.
145. Of the sibilants, none may stand unaltered at the end of a word. The स् s (which of all
final consonants would otherwise be the commonest) is, like  r, changed to a breathing, the
visarga. The  ç either reverts (43) to its original क k, or, in some roots, is changed to ट ṭ (in
accordance with its changes in inflection and derivation: see below, 218): thus, िदक dik, but िवट
viṭ. The ष् ṣ is likewise changed to ट ṭ: thus, ावृट prāvṛṭ.
a. The change of ṣ to ṭ is of rare occurrence: see below, 226 d.

b. Final radical s is said by the grammarians to be changed to t; but no sure example of
this conversion is quotable; see 168; and compare 555 a.
146. The compound  kṣ is prescribed to be treated as simple ष् ṣ (not becoming क k by
150, below). But the case is a rare one, and its actual treatment in the older language
irregular.
a. In the only RV. cases where the kṣ has a quasi-radical character—namely anák from
anákṣ, and ámyak from √myakṣ—the conversion is to k. Also, of forms of the s-aorist (see 890),
we have adhāk, asrāk, arāik, etc. (for adhākṣ-t etc.); but also aprāṭ, ayāṭ, avāṭ, asrāṭ (for
aprākṣ-t etc.). And RV. has twice ayās from √yaj, and AV. twice srās from √sṛj (wrongly referred
by BR. to √sraṅs), both 2d sing., where the personal ending has perhaps crowded out the root-
final and tense-sign.
b. The numeral ṣaṣ six is perhaps better to be regarded as ṣakṣ, with its kṣ treated as ṣ,
according to the accepted rule.
147. The aspiration  h is not allowed to maintain itself, but (like ज् j and  ç) either reverts
to its original guttural form, appearing as क k, or is changed to ट ṭ—both in accordance with its
treatment in inflection: see below, 222. And, also as in inflection, the original sonant aspiration
of a few roots (given at 155b) reappears when their final thus becomes deaspirated. Where the
 h is from original ध् dh (223e), it becomes त् t.
148. The visarga and anusvāra are nowhere etymologically finals; the former is only the
substitue for an original final स् s or  r; the later occurs as final only so far as it is a
substitute for म् m (213h).
149. Apart from the vowels, then, the usual finals, nearly in the order of their frequency,
are: ◌ः ḥ, म् m, न् n, त् t, क k, प् p, ट ṭ; those of only sporadic occurrence are ङ n̄, ल् l, ण् ṇ; and,
by substitution, ◌ं ṁ.
150. In general, only one consonant, of whatever kind, is allowed to stand at the end of a
word; if two or more would etymologically occur there, the last is dropped, and again the last,
and so on, till only one remains.

a. Thus, tudants becomes tudant, and this tudan; udañc-s becomes udan̄k (142), and this
udan̄; and achāntst (s-aor., 3d sing., of √chand [890b]) is in like manner reduced to achān.
b. But a non-nasal mute, if radical and not suffixal, is retained after r: thus, ū́rk from ūrj,
várk from √vṛj, avart from √vṛt, ámārṭ from √mṛj, suhā́rt from suhārd. The case is not a
common one.
c. For relics of former double finals, preserved by the later language under the disguise of
apparent euphonic combinations, see below, 207 ff.
151. Anomalous conversions of a final mute to one of another class are occasionally met
with. Examples are:
a. Of final t to k; thus, 1. in a few words that have assumed a special value as particles, as
jyók, tāják (beside tāját), ṛ́dhak (beside ṛ́dhat), pṛ́thak, drāk; and of kindred character is
khādagdánt (TA.); 2. in here and there a verbal form, as sāviṣak (AV. and VS. Kāṇ.), dambhiṣak
(Āpast.), aviṣak (Pārask.), āhalak (VS. MS.; = āharat); 3. in root-finals or the t added to root-
stems (383 e), as -dhṛk for -dhṛt (Sūtras and later) at the end of compounds, suçrúk (TB.), pṛkṣú
(SV.); and 4. we may further note here the anomalous en̄kṣva (AB.; for intsva, √idh) and
avāksam (AB.), and the feminines in knī from masculines in ta (1176 d).
b. Of final d or t to a lingual: thus, pad in Vedic paḍbhís, páḍgṛbhi, páḍbīça; upānáḍbhyām
(ÇB.); vy avāṭ (MS. iii. 4. 9; √vas shine), and perhaps ápā ’rāṭ (MS.; or √raj?).
c. Of k or j to t, in an isolated example or two, as samyát, ásṛt, viçvasṛ́t (TS. K.), and
prayátsu (VS. TS.; AV. -kṣu).
d. In Tāittirīya texts, of the final of anuṣṭúbh and triṣṭúbh to a guttural: as, anuṣṭúk ca,
triṣṭúgbhis, anuṣṭúgbhyas.
e. Of a labial to a dental: in kakúd for and beside kakúbh; in saṁsṛ́dbhis (TS.) from √sṛp;
and in adbhís, adbhyás, from ap or āp (393). Excepting the first, these look like cases of
dissimilation; yet examples of the combination bbh are not very rare in the older language:
thus, kakúbbhyām, triṣṭúbbhis, kakúbbhaṇḍá, anuṣṭúb bhí.
f. The forms pratidhúṣas, -ṣā (Tāittirīya texts) from pratidúh are isolated anomalies.
152. For all the processes of external combination—that is to say, in composition and
sentence-collocation—a stem-final or word-final is in general to be regarded as having, not its
etymological form, but that given by the rules as to permitted finals. From this, however, are to
be excepted the s and r: the various transformations of these sounds have nothing to do with
the visarga to which as

finals before a pause they have—doubtless at a comparatively recent period of phonetic history
—come to be reduced. Words will everywhere in this work be written with final s or r instead
of ḥ; and the rules of combination will be stated as for the two more original sounds, and not
for the visarga.
Deaspiration.
153. An aspirate mute is changed to a non-aspirate before another non-nasal mute or before
a sibilant; it stands unaltered only before a vowel or semivowel or nasal.
a. Such a case can only arise in internal combination, since the processes of external
combination presuppose the reduction of the aspirate to a non-aspirate surd (152).
b. Practically, also, the rules as to changes of aspirates concern almost only the sonant
aspirates, since the surd, being of later development and rarer occurrence, are hardly ever
found in situations that call for their application.
154. Hence, if such a mute is to be doubled, it is doubled by prefixing its own
corresponding non-aspirate.
a. But in the manuscripts, both Vedic and later, an aspirate mute is not seldom found
written double—especially, if it be one of rare occurrence: for example (RV.), akhkhalī, jájhjhatī.
155. In a few roots, when a final sonant aspirate (घ् gh, ध् dh, भ् bh; also  h, as
representing an original घ् gh) thus loses its aspiration, the initial sonant consonant (ग् g or  d
or ब् b) becomes aspirate.
a. That is to say, the original initial aspirate of such roots is restored, when its presence
does not interfere with the euphonic law, of comparatively recent origin, which (in Sanskrit and
Greek) forbids a root to both begin and end with an aspirate.
b. The roots which allow this peculiar change are:
in gh—dagh;
in h (for original gh)—dah, dih, duh, druh, dṛṅh, guh; and also grah (in the later
desiderative jighṛkṣa);
in dh—bandh, bādh, budh;
in bh—dabh (but only in the later desiderative dhipsa, for which the older language has
dipsa).

c. The same change appears when the law as to finals causes the loss of the aspiration at
the end of the root: see above, 141.
d. But from dah, duh, druh, and guh are found in the Veda also forms without the restored
initial aspirate: thus, dakṣat; adukṣat; dudukṣa etc.; jugukṣa; mitradrúk.
e. The same analogy is followed by dadh, the abbreviated substitute of the present-stems
dadhā, from √dhā (667), in some of the forms of conjugation: thus, dhatthas from dadh + thas,
adhatta from adadh + ta, adhaddhvam from adadh + dhvam, etc.
f. No case is met with of the throwing back of an aspiration upon combination with the 2d
sing. impv. act. ending dhi: thus, dugdhi, daddhi (RV.), but dhugdhvam, dhaddhvam.
Surd and Sonant Assimilation.
156. Under this head, there is especially one very marked and important difference between
the internal combinations of a root or stem with suffixes and endings, and the external
combinations of stem with stem in composition and of word with word in sentence-making:
namely—
157. a. In internal combination, the initial vowel or semivowel or nasal of an ending of
inflection or derivation exercises no altering influence upon a final consonant of the root or
stem to which it is added.
b. To this rule there are some exceptions: thus, some of the derivatives noted at 111 d;
final d of a root before the participial suffix na (957 d); and the forms noted below, 161 b.
c. In external combination, on the other hand, an initial sonant of whatever class, even a
vowel or semivowel or nasal, requires the conversion of a final surd to sonant.
d. It has been pointed out above (152) that in the rules of external combination only
admitted finals, along with s and r, need to be taken account of, all others being regarded as
reduced to these before combining with initials.
158. Final vowels, nasals, and ल् l are nowhere liable to change in the processes of surd
and sonant assimilation.
a. The r, however, has a corresponding surd in s, to which it is sometimes changed in
external combination, under circumstances that favor a surd utterance (178).

159. With the exceptions above stated, the collision of surd and sonant sounds is avoided in
combinations—and, regularly and usually, by assimilating the final to the following initial, or by
regressive assimilation.
Thus, in internal combination: átsi, átti, atthás, attá (√ad + si etc.); çagdhí, çagdhvám (√çak
+ dhi etc.);—in external combination, ábhūd ayám, jyóg jīva, ṣáḍ açītáyaḥ, triṣṭúb ápi, dig-gaja,
ṣaḍ-ahá, arcád-dhūma, bṛhád-bhānu, ab-já.
160. If, however, a final sonant aspirate of a root is followed by त् t or थ् th of an ending,
the assimilation is in the other direction, or progressive: the combination is made sonant, and
the aspiration of the final (lost according to 153, above) is transferred to the initial of the
ending.
Thus, gh with t or th becomes gdh; dh with the same becomes ddh, as buddhá (√budh +
ta), runddhás (√rundh + thas or tas); bh with the same becomes bdh, as labdhá (√labh + ta),
labdhvā́ (√labh + tvā).
a. Moreover, h, as representing original gh, is treated in the same manner: thus, dugdhá,
dógdhum from duh—and compare rūḍhá and līḍhá from ruh and lih, etc., 222 b.
b. In this combination, as the sonant aspiration is not lost but transferred, the restoration of
the initial aspiration (155) does not take place.
c. In dadh from √dhā (155 e), the more normal method is followed; the dh is made surd,
and the initial aspirated: thus, dhatthas, dhattas. And RV. has dhaktam instead of dagdham from
√dagh; and TA. has inttām instead of inddhām from √idh.
161. Before a nasal in external combination, a final mute may be simply made sonant, or it
may be still further assimilated, being changed to the nasal of its own class.
Thus, either tád námas or tán námas, vā́g me or vā́n̄ me, báḍ mahā́n or báṇ mahā́n, triṣṭúb
nūnám or triṣṭúm nūnám.
a. In practice, the conversion into a nasal is almost invariably made in the manuscripts, as,
indeed, it is by the Prātiçākhyas required and not permitted merely. Even by the general
grammarians it is required in the compound ṣáṇṇavati, and before mātrā, and the suffix maya
(1225): thus, vān̄máya, mṛnmáya.
b. Even in internal combination, the same assimilation is made in some of the derivatives
noted in 111 d, and in the na-participles (957 d). And a few sporadic instances are met with
even in verb-inflection: thus,

stin̄noti, stin̄nuyāt (MS.; for stighn-), mṛnnīta (LÇS.; for mṛdn-), jān̄mayana (KS.; for jāgm-);
these, however (like the double aspirates, 154a), are doubtless to be rejected as false readings.
162. Before l, a final t is not merely made sonant, but fully assimilated, becoming l: thus, tál
labhate, úlluptam.
163. Before  h (the case occurs only in external combination), a final mute is made sonant;
and then the  h may either remain unchanged or be converted into the sonant aspirate
corresponding with the former: thus, either तिह tád hí or ति tád dhí.
a. In practice, the latter method is almost invariably followed; and the grammarians of the
Prātiçākhya period are nearly unanimous in requiring it. The phonetic difference between the
two is very slight.
Examples are: vā́g ghutáḥ, ṣáḍḍhotā (ṣaṭ + hotā), taddhita (tat + hita), anuṣṭúb bhí.
Combinations of final स् s and  r.
164. The euphonic changes of स् s and  r are best considered together, because of the
practical relation of the two sounds, in composition and sentence-collocation, as corresponding
surd and sonant: in a host of cases स् s becomes  r in situations requiring or favoring the
occurrence of a sonant; and, much less often,  r becomes स् s where a surd is required.
a. In internal combination, the two are far less exchangeable with one another: and this
class of cases may best be taken up first.
165. Final r radical or quasi-radical (that is, not belonging to an ending of derivation)
remains unchanged before both surd and sonant sounds, and even before su in declension:
thus, píparṣi, caturthá, catúrṣu, pūrṣú.
166. Final radical s remains before a surd in general, and usually before s, as in çā́ssi,
çāssva, āsse, āçī́ṣṣu (the last is also written āçī́ḥṣu: 172): but it is lost in ási (√as + si: 636).
Before a sonant (that is, bh) in declension, it is treated as in external combination: thus,
āçī́rbhis. Before a sonant (that is, dh) in conjugation, it appears to be dropped, at least after
long ā: thus, çādhi, çaçādhi, cakādhi (the only quotable cases); in edhí (√as + dhi: 636) the root
syllable is irregularly altered; but in 2d perss. pl., made with dhvam, as ādhvam, çādhvam,
arādhvam (881 a), vadhvam (√vas

57
Final S and T.
[-169
clothe), it is, on account of the equivalence and interchangeability of dhv and ddvh (232),
impossible to say whether the s in omitted or converted into d.
a. Final radical s is very rare; RV. (twice, both 2d pers. sing.) treats ághas from √ghas in
the same manner as any ordinary word ending in as.
b. For certain cases of irregular loss of the s of a root or tense-stem, see 233 b–e.
167. In a few very rare cases, final radical s before s is changed to t (perhaps by
dissimilation): they are, from √vas dwell (also sporadically from vas shine, ÇB., and vas clothe,
Har.), the future vatsyā́mi and aorist ávātsam; from √ghas, the desiderative stem jíghatsa.
a. For t as apparent ending of the 3d sing. in s-verbs, see 555 a.
168. According to the grammarians, the final s of certain other roots, used as noun-stems,
becomes t at the end of the word, and before bh and su: thus, dhvat, dhvadbhis, sradbhyas,
sratsu. But genuine examples of such change are not quotable.
a. Sporadic cases of a like convention are found in the Veda: namely, mādbhís and
mādbhyás from mā́s: uṣádbhis from uṣás; svátavadbhyas from svátavas; svávadbhis etc. (not
quotable) from svávas. But the actuality of the conversion here is open to grave doubt; it rather
seems the substitution of a t-stem for an s-stem. The same is true of the change of vāṅs to vat
in the declension of perfect participles (458). The stem anaḍvah (404), from anas-vah, is
anomalous and isolated.
b. In the compound ducchúnā (dus-çunā) and párucchepa (parus-çepa), the final s of the first
member is treated as if a t (203).
169. As the final consonant of derivative stems and of inflected forms, both of declension
and of conjugation, s is extremely frequent; and its changes form a subject of first-rate
importance in Sanskrit euphony. The r, on the other hand, is quite rare.
a. The r is found as original final in certain case-forms of stems in ṛ or ar (369 ff.); in root-
stems in ir and ur from roots in ṛ (383 b); in a small number of other stems, as svàr, áhar and
ū́dhar (beside áhan and ū́dhan: 430), dvā́r or dur, and the Vedic vádhar, uṣarvasar-, vanar-,
çrutar-, sapar-, sabar-, athar- (cf. 176 c); in a few particles, as antár, prātár, púnar; and in the
numeral catúr (482 g).
b. The euphonic treatment of s and r yielding precisely the same result after all vowels
except a and ā, there are certain forms with regard to which it is uncertain whether they end
in s or r, and opinions differ respecting them. Such are ur (or us) of the gen.-abl. sing. of ṛ-
stems (371 c), and us (or ur) of the 3d plur. of verbs (550 c).

170. a. The स् s, as already noticed (145), becomes visarga before a pause.
b. It is retained unchanged only when followed by त् t or थ् th, the surd mutes of its own
class.
c. Before the palatal and lingual surd mutes—च् c and छ ch, ट ṭ and ठ ṭh—it is assimilated,
becoming the sibilant of either class respectively, namely  ç or ष् ṣ.
d. Before the guttural and labial surd mutes—क k and ख् kh, प् p and फ ph—it is also
theoretically assimilated, becoming respectively the jihvāmūlīya and upadhmānīya spirants (69);
but in practice these breathings are unknown and the conversion is to visarga.
Examples are: to b. tatas te, cakṣus te; to c. tataç ca, tasyāç chāyā; pādaṣ ṭalati; to d. nalaḥ
kāmam, puruṣaḥ khanati; yaçaḥ prāpa, vṛkṣaḥ phalavān.
171. The first three of these rules are almost universal; to the last one there are numerous
exceptions, the sibilant being retained (or, by 180, converted into ṣ), especially in compounds;
but also, in the Veda, even in sentence combination.
a. In the Veda, the retention of the sibilant in compounds is the general rule, the exceptions
to which are detailed in the Vedic grammars.
b. In the later language, the retention is mainly determined by the intimacy or the antiquity
and frequency of the combination. Thus, the final sibilant of a preposition or a word fitting the
office of a preposition before a verbal root is wont to be preserved; and that of a stem before a
derivative of √kṛ, before pati, before kalpa and kāma, and so on. Examples are namaskāra,
vācaspati, āyuṣkāma, payaskalpa.
c. The Vedic retention of the sibilant in sentence-collocation is detailed in full in the
Prātiçākhyas. The chief classes of cases are: 1. the final of a preposition or its like before a
verbal form; 2. of a genitive before a governing noun: as divás putráḥ, iḍás padé; 3. of an
ablative before pári: as himávatas pári; 4. of other less classifiable cases: as dyāúṣ pitā́, tríṣ
pūtvā́, yás pátiḥ, paridhíṣ pátāti, etc.
172. Before an initial sibilant— ç, ष् ṣ, स् s—स् s is either assimilated, becoming the same
sibilant, or it is changed into visarga.
a. The native grammarians are in some measure at variance (see APr. ii. 40, note) as to
which of these changes should be made, and in

part they allow either at pleasure. The usage of the manuscripts is also discordant; the
conversion to visarga is the prevalent practice, though the sibilant is also not infrequently found
written, especially in South-Indian manuscripts. European editors generally write visarga; but
the later dictionaries and glossaries generally make the alphabetic place of a word the same as
if the sibilant were read instead.
Examples are: manuḥ svayam or manus svayam; indraḥ çūraḥ or indraç çūraḥ; tā́ḥ ṣaṭ or tāṣ
ṣaṭ.
173. There are one or two exceptions to these rules:
a. If the initial sibilant has a surd mute after it, the final s may be dropped altogether—and
by some authorities is required to be so dropped. Thus, vāyava stha or vāyavaḥ stha;
catustanām or catuḥstanām. With regard to this point the usage of the different manuscripts
and editions is greatly at variance.
b. Before ts, the s is allowed to become visarga, instead of being retained.
174. Before a sonant, either vowel or consonant (except  r: see 179), स् s is changed to the
sonant  r—unless, indeed, it be preceded by अ a or आ ā.
Examples are: devapatir iva, çrīr iva; manur gacchati, tanūr apsu; svasṝr ajanayat; tayor
adṛṣṭakāmaḥ; sarvāir guṇāiḥ; agner manve.
a. For a few cases like dūḍāça, dūṇāça, see below, 199d.
b. The exclamation bhos (456) loses its s before vowels and sonant consonants: thus, bho
nāiṣadha (and the s is sometimes found omitted also before surds).
c. The endings अस् as and आस् ās (both of which are extremely common) follow rules of their
own, namely:
175. a. Final अस् as, before any sonant consonant and before short अ a, is changed to ओ o
—and the अ a after it is lost.
b. The resulting accentuation, and the fact that the loss of a is only occasional in the older
language of the Veda, have been pointed out above, 135a, c.
Examples are: nalo nāma, brahmaṇyo vedavit; manobhava; hantavyo ‘smi; anyonya (anyas +
anya), yaçortham (yaças + artham).
c. Final अस् as before any other vowel than अ a loses its स् s, becoming simple अ a; and the
hiatus thus occasioned remains.

d. That is to say, the o from as is treated as an original e is treated in same situation: see
132–3.
Examples are: bṛhadaçva uvāca, āditya iva, námaükti, vásyaïṣṭi.
176. Exceptions to the rules as to final as are:
a. The nominative masculine pronouns sás and eṣás and (Vedic) syás (495 a, 499 a, b) lose
their s before any consonant: thus, sa dadarça he saw, eṣa puruṣaḥ this man; but so ‘bravīt he
said, puruṣaḥ eṣaḥ.
b. Instances are met with, both in the earlier and in the later language, of effacement of the
hiatus after alteration of as, by combination of the remaining final a with the following initial
vowel: thus, tato ’vāca (tatas + uvāca), payoṣṇī (payas + uṣṇī), adhāsana (adhas + āsana):
compare 133 c, 177 b. In the Veda, such a combination is sometimes shown by the metre to be
required, though the written text has the hiatus. But sa in RV. is in the great majority of cases
combined with the following vowel: e.g. sé ’d for sá íd, sā́ ’smāi for sá asmāi, sāú ’ṣadhīḥ for sá
óṣadhīḥ; and similar examples are found also in the other Vedic texts.
c. Other sporadic irregularities in the treatment of final as occur. Thus, it is changed to ar
instead of o once in RV. in avás, once in SV. in ávas (RV. ávo), once in MS. in dambhiṣas; in
bhuvas (second of the trio of sacred utterances bhūs, bhuvas, svar), except in its earliest
occurrences; in a series of words in a Brāhmaṇa passage (TS. K.), viz. jinvár, ugrár, bhīmár,
tveṣár, çrutár, bhūtár, and (K. only) pūtár; in janar and mahar; and some of the ar-stems noted
at 169 a are perhaps of kindred character. On the other hand, as is several times changed to o
in RV. before a surd consonant; and sás twice, and yás once, retains its final sibilant in a like
position.
d. In MS., the final a left before hiatus by alteration of either as (o) or e (133) is made long
if itself unaccented and if the following initial vowel is accented: thus, sū́rā éti (from sū́ras +
éti), nirupyátā índrāya (from -yáte + índ-), and also kāryā̀ éka- (from kāryàs, because virtually
kārías); but ādityá índraḥ (from ādityás + índraḥ), etá ítare (from eté + ítare).
177. Final आस् ās before any sonant, whether vowel or consonant, loses its स् s, becoming
simple आ ā; and a hiatus thus occasioned remains.
a. The maintenance of the hiatus in these cases, as in that of o and e and āi (above, 133–
4), seems to indicate a recent loss of the intermediate sound. Opinions are divided as to what
this should have been. Some of the native grammarians assimilate the case of ās to that of āi,

61
[-180
Combinations of Final r.
assuming the conversion of āy in both alike—but probably only as a matter of formal
convenience in rule-making.
b. Here, too (as in the similar cases of e and āi and o: 133 c, 176b), there are examples to
be found, both earlier and later, of effacement of the hiatus.
178. Final  r, in general, shows the same form which स् s would show under the same
conditions.
a. Thus, it becomes visarga when final, and a sibilant or visarga before an initial surd mute
or sibilant (170): thus, rudatī punaḥ, dvās tat, svàç ca, catúçcatvāriṅçat; and (111c, d)
prātastána, antastya, catuṣṭaya, dhūstva; prātaḥ karoti, antaḥpāta.
b. But original final r preceded by a or ā maintains itself unchanged before a sonant: thus,
punar eti, prātarjit, ákar jyótiḥ, áhār dā́mnā, vārdhi.
c. The r is preserved unchanged even before a surd in a number of Vedic compounds: thus,
aharpáti; svàrcanas, svàrcakṣas, svàrpati, svarṣā́, svàrṣāti; dhūrṣád, dhūrṣah; pū́rpati, vārkāryá,
āçī́rpada, punartta; and in some of these the r is optionally retained in the later language. The
RV. also has āvar támaḥ once in sentence-combination.
d. On the other hand, final ar of the verb-form āvar is changed to o before a sonant in
several cases in RV. And r is lost, like s, in one or two cases in the same text: thus, akṣā
índuḥ, áha evá.
179. A double r is nowhere admitted: if such would occur, either by retention of an original
r or by conversion of s to r, one r is omitted, and the preceding vowel, if short, is made long
by compensation.
Thus, punā ramate, nṛpatī rājati, mātū́ rihán, jyotīratha, dūrohaṇá.
a. In some Vedic texts, however, there are instances of ar changed to o before initial r:
thus, svò rohāva.
Conversion of स् s to ष् ṣ.
180. The dental sibilant स् s is changed to the lingual ष् ṣ, if immediately preceded by any
vowel save अ a and आ ā, or by क k or  r—unless the स् s be final, or followed by  r.
a. The assimilating influence of the preceding lingual vowels and semivowel is obvious
enough; that of k and the other vowels appears to be due to a somewhat retracted position of
the tongue in the mouth during

180—]
62
III. Euphonic Combination.
their utterance, causing its tip to reach the roof of the mouth more easily at a point further
back than the dental one.
b. The general Hindu grammar prescribes the same change after a l also; but the
Prātiçākhyas give no such rule, and phonetic considerations, the l being a dental sound, are
absolutely against it. Actual cases of the combination do not occur in the older language, nor
have any been pointed out in the later.
c. The vowels that cause the alteration of s to ṣ may be called for brevity’s sake “alterant”
vowels.
181. Hence, in the interior of a Sanskrit word, the dental s is not usually found after any
vowel save a and ā, but, instead of it the lingual ṣ. But—
a. A following r prevents the conversion: thus, usra, tiaras, tamisra. And it is but seldom
made in the forms and derivatives of a root containing an r-element (whether r or ṛ), whatever
the position of that element: thus, sisarti, sisṛtam, sarīsṛpá, tistire, parisrút. To this rule there
are a few exceptions, as viṣṭír, viṣṭārá, níṣṭṛta, víṣpardhas, gáviṣṭhira, etc. In ajuṣran the final ṣ
of a root is preserved even immediately before r.
b. This dissimilating influence of a following r, as compared with the invariable assimilating
influence of a preceding r, is peculiar and problematic.
c. The recurrence of ṣ in successive syllables is sometimes avoided by leaving the former s
unchanged: thus, sisakṣi, but siṣakti; yāsisīṣṭās, but yāsiṣīmahi. Similarly, in certain desiderative
formations: see below, 184e.
d. Other cases are sporadic: RV. has the forms sisice and sisicus (but siṣicatus), and the
stems ṛbī́sa, kīstá, bísa, busá, bṛ́saya; a single root pis, with its derivative pesuka, is found once
in ÇB.; MS. has mṛsmṛṣā́; músala begins to be found in AV.; and such cases grow more
numerous; for puṁs and the roots niṅs and hiṅs, see below, 183a.
182. On the other hand (as was pointed out above, 62), the occurrence of ṣ in Sanskrit
words is nearly limited to cases falling under this rule: others are rather sporadic anomalies—
except where ṣ is the product of ç or kṣ before a dental, as in draṣṭum, caṣṭe, tvaṣṭar: see 218,
221. Thus, we find—
a. Four roots, kaṣ, laṣ, bhaṣ, bhāṣ, of which the last is common and is found as early as the
Brāhmaṇas.
b. Further, in RV., áṣa, kaváṣa, caṣā́la, cā́ṣa, jálāṣa, pāṣyà, baṣkáya, váṣaṭ (for vakṣat?),
kā́ṣṭhā; and, by anomalous alteration of original s, -ṣāh (turāṣā́h etc.), áṣāḍha, upaṣṭút, and
probably apāṣṭhá and aṣṭhīvánt. Such cases grow more common later.
c. The numeral ṣaṣ, as already noted (149 b), is more probably ṣakṣ.

183. The nasalization of the alterant vowel—or, in other words, its being followed by
anusvāra—does not prevent its altering effect upon the sibilant: thus, havīṅṣi, parūṅṣi. And the
alteration takes place in the initial s of an ending after the final s of a stem, whether the latter
be regarded as also changed to ṣ or as converted into visarga: thus, haviṣṣu or haviḥṣu,
paruṣṣu or paruḥṣu.
a. But the s of puṁs (394) remains unchanged, apparently on account of the retained sense
of its value as pums; also that of √hiṅs, because of its value as hins (hinasti etc.); √niṅs (RV.
only) is more questionable.
184. The principle cases of alteration of s in internal combination are these:
a. In endings, inflectional or derivative, beginning with s—thus, su; si, se, sva; s of sibilant-
aorist, future, and desiderative; suffixes sna, snu, sya, etc.—after a final alterant vowel or
consonant of root or stem, or a union-vowel: thus, juhoṣi, çeṣe, anāiṣam, bhaviṣyāmi, çuçrūṣe,
deṣṇa, jiṣṇu, vikṣu, akārṣam.
b. The final s of a stem before an ending or suffix: thus: haviṣā, haviṣas, etc., from havis;
çakṣuṣmant, çociṣka, mānuṣa, manuṣya, jyotiṣṭva.
c. Roots having a final sibilant (except ç) after an alterant vowel are—with the exception of
fictitious ones and pis, niṅs, hiṅs—regarded as ending in ṣ, not s; and concerning the treatment
of this ṣ in combination, see below, 225–6.
d. The initial s of a root after a reduplication: thus, siṣyade, suṣvāpa, sīṣāsati, coṣkūyate,
saniṣvaṇat.
e. Excepted is in general an initial radical s in a desiderative stem, when the desiderative-
sign becomes ṣ: thus, sisīrṣati from √sṛ, sisan̄kṣati from √sañj. And there are other scattering
cases, as tresus (perf. from √tras), etc.
185. But the same change occurs also, on a considerable scale, in external combination,
especially in composition. Thus:
a. Both in verbal forms and in derivatives, the final i or u of a preposition or other like
prefix ordinarily lingualizes the initial s of the root to which it is prefixed; since such
combinations are both of great frequency and of peculiar intimacy, analogous with those of root
or stem and affix: thus, abhiṣā́c, pratiṣṭhā́, níṣikta, víṣita; anuṣvadhám, suṣéka; the cases are
numberless.
b. The principle exceptions are in accordance with the principles already laid down: namely,
when the root contains an r-element, and when a recurrence of the sibilant would take place.
But there are also others, of a more irregular character; and the complete account of the
treatment of initial radical s after a prefix would be matter of great detail, and not worth giving
here.

c. Not infrequently, the initial s, usually altered after a certain prefix, retains the altered
sibilant even after an interposed a of augment or reduplication: thus, aty aṣṭhāt, abhy aṣṭhām,
pary aṣasvajat, vy aṣahanta, ny aṣadāma, nir aṣṭhāpayan, abhy aṣiñcan, vy aṣṭabhnāt; vi taṣṭhe,
vi taṣṭhire.
d. Much more anomalous is the occasional alteration of initial radical s after an a-element of
a prefix. Such cases are ava ṣṭambh (against ni stambh and prati stambh) and (according to the
grammarians) ava ṣvan.
186. In other compounds, the final alterant vowel of the first member not infrequently
(especially in the Veda) lingualizes the initial s of the second: for example, yudhiṣṭhira, pitṛṣvasṛ,
goṣṭhá, agniṣṭomá, anuṣṭúbh, tríṣaṁdhi, diviṣád, parameṣṭhín, abhiṣená, pitṛṣád, puruṣṭutá.
a. A very few cases occur of the same alteration after an a-element: thus, saṣtúbh,
avaṣṭambha, savyaṣṭhā́, apāṣṭhā́, upaṣṭút; also √sah, when its final, by 147, becomes ṭ: thus,
satrāṣā́ṭ (but satrāsā́ham).
187. The final s of the first member of a compound often becomes ṣ after an alterant vowel:
thus, the s of a prepositional prefix, as niṣṣídhvan, duṣṭára (for duṣṣtára), āvíṣkṛta; and,
regularly, a s retained instead of being converted to visarga before a labial or guttural mute
(171 a), as haviṣpā́, jyotiṣkṛ́t; tapuṣpā́.
188. Once more, in the Veda, the same alteration, both of an initial and of a final s, is not
infrequent even between the words composing a sentence. The cases are detailed in the
Prātiçākhya belonging to each text, and are of very various character. Thus:
a. The initial s, especially of particles; as ū ṣú, hí ṣma, kám u ṣvít;—also of pronouns: as hí
ṣáḥ;—of verb-forms, especially from √as: as hí ṣṭhá, diví ṣṭha;—and in other scattering cases: as
u ṣṭuhi, nū́ ṣṭhirám, trī́ ṣadhásthā, ádhi ṣṇóḥ, nákiḥ ṣáḥ, yájuḥ ṣkannám, agníḥ ṣṭave.
b. A final s, oftenest before pronouns (especially toneless ones): as agníṣ ṭvā, níṣ ṭe, īyúṣ ṭé,
çúciṣ ṭvám, sádhiṣ ṭáva;—but also in other cases, and wherever a final s is preserved, instead of
being turned into visarga, before a guttural or labial (171): as tríṣ pūtvā́, ā́yuṣ kṛṇotu, vā́stoṣ
pátiḥ, dyāúṣ pitā́, víbhiṣ pátāt.
Conversion of न् n to ण् ṇ.
189. The dental nasal न् n, when immediately followed by a vowel or by न् n or म् m or य् y
or व् v, is turned into the lingual ण् ṇ if preceded in the same word by the

65
[-191
Conversion of n to ṇ
lingual sibilant or semivowels or vowels—that is to say, by ष् ṣ,  r, or ऋ ṛ or ॠ ṝ—: and
this, not only if the altering letter stands immediately before the nasal, but at whatever
distance from the latter it may be found: unless, indeed, there intervene (a consonant moving
the front of the tongue: namely) a palatal (except य् y), a lingual, or a dental.
a. We may thus figure to ourselves the rationale of the process: in the marked proclivity of
the language toward lingual utterance, especially of the nasal, the tip of the tongue, when once
reverted into the loose lingual position by the utterance of a non-contact lingual element, tends
to hang there and make its next nasal contact in that position; and does so, unless the
proclivity is satisfied by the utterance of a lingual mute, or the organ is thrown out of
adjustment by the utterance of an element which causes it to assume a different posture. This
is not the case with the gutturals or labials, which do not move the front part of the tongue
(and, as the influence of k on following s shows, the guttural position favors the succession of a
lingual): and the y is too weakly palatal to interfere with the alteration (as its next relative, the
i-vowel, itself lingualizes a s).
b. This is a rule of constant application; and (as was pointed out above, 46) the great
majority of occurrences of ṇ in the language are a result of it.
190. The rule has force especially—
a. When suffixes, of influence or derivation, are added to roots or stems containing one of
the altering sounds; thus, rudréṇa, rudrā́ṇām, vā́riṇe, vā́riṇī, vā́rīṇi, dātṝ́ṇi, hárāṇi, dvéṣāṇi,
krīṇā́mi, çṛṇóti, kṣubhāṇá, ghṛṇá, kárṇa, vṛkṇá, rugṇá, dráviṇa, iṣáṇi, purāṇá, rékṇas, cákṣaṇa,
cíkīrṣamāṇa, kṛ́pamāṇa.
b. When the final n of a root or stem comes to be followed, in inflection or derivation, by
such sounds as allow it to feel the effect of a preceding altering cause: thus, from √ran, ráṇanti,
ráṇyati, rāraṇa, arāṇiṣus; from brahman, bráhmaṇā, bráhmāṇi, brāhmaṇá, brahmaṇyà,
bráhmaṇvant.
c. The form piṇak (RV.: 2d and 3d sing. impf.), from √piṣ, is wholly anomalous.
191. This rule (like that for the change of s to ṣ) applies strictly and especially when the
nasal and the cause of its alteration both lie within the limits of the same integral word; but
(also like the other) it is extended, within certain limits, to compound words—and even, in the
Veda, to contiguous words in the sentence.

192. Especially, a preposition or similar prefix to a root, if it contain r or end in euphonic r
for s (174), very often lingualizes the n of a root or of its derived stems and forms. Thus:
a. The initial n of a root is usually and regularly so altered, in all forms and derivatives,
after parā, pari, pra, nir (for nis), antar, dur (for dus): thus, párā ṇaya, pári ṇīyate, prá
ṇudasva; parāṇutti, pariṇāma, praṇavá, nirṇíj, durṇáça. Roots suffering this change are written
with initial ṇ in the native root-lists. The only exceptions of importance are nṛt, nabh, nand, and
naç when its ç becomes ṣ (as in pránaṣṭa).
b. The final n of a root is lingualized in some of the forms of an and han: thus, prā́ ’ṇiti,
prāṇá, prá haṇyate, praháṇana.
c. The class-signs nu and nā are altered after the roots hi and mī́: thus, pári hiṇomi, prá
miṇanti (but the latter not in the Veda).
d. The 1st sing. impv. ending āni is sometimes altered: thus, prá bhavāṇi.
e. Derivatives by suffixes containing n sometimes have ṇ by influence of a preposition: thus,
prayā́ṇa.
f. The n of the preposition ni is sometimes altered, like the initial of a root, after another
preposition: thus, praṇipāta, praṇidhi.
193. In compound words, an altering cause in one member sometimes lingualizes a n of the
next following member—either its initial or final n, or n in its inflectional or derivative ending.
The exercise of the altering influence can be seen to depend in part upon the closeness or
frequency of the compound, or its integration by being made the base of a derivative. Examples
are: grāmaṇī́, triṇāman, urūṇasá; vṛtraháṇam etc. (but vṛtraghnā́ etc.: 195 a), nṛmáṇas,
drughaṇá; pravā́haṇa, nṛpā́ṇa, pūryā́ṇa, pitṛyā́ṇa; svargéṇa, durgā́ṇi, usráyāmṇe, tryan̄gā́ṇām.
194. Finally, in the Veda, a n (usually initial) is occasionally lingualized even by an altering
sound in another word. The toneless pronouns nas and ena- are oftenest thus affected: thus,
pári ṇas, prāí ’ṇān, índra eṇam; but also of the particle ná like: thus, vā́r ṇá; and a few other
cases, as vár ṇā́ma, púnar ṇayāmasi, agnér áveṇa. More anomalous, and perhaps to be rejected
as false readings, are such as trī́ṇ imā́n and akṣā́ṇ áva and suhā́rṇ ṇaḥ (MS.), and vyṛṣaṇ vā
(Āpast.).
195. a. The immediate combination of a n with a preceding guttural or labial seems in some
cases to hinder the conversion to ṇ: thus, vṛtraghnā́ etc., kṣubhnāti, tṛpnoti (but in Veda tṛpṇu),
kṣepnú, suṣumná.
b. The RV. has the exceptions úṣṭrānām and rāṣṭrā́nām.
Conversion of dental mutes to linguals and palatals.
196. When a dental mute comes in contact with a lingual or palatal mute or sibilant, the
dental is usually assimilated, becoming lingual or palatal respectively.

The cases are the following:
197. A dental surd mute or nasal, or the dental sibilant, when immediately preceded by a ṣ,
is everywhere converted into the corresponding lingual.
a. Under this rule, the combinations ṣṭ, ṣṭh, and ṣṇ are very common; ṣṣ is rarely so
written, the visarga being put instead of the former sibilant (172): thus, jyótiḥṣu instead of
jyótiṣṣu.
b. Much less often, dh is changed to ḍh after final ṣ of a root or tense-stem, with loss of the
ṣ or its conversion to ḍ: see 226 c.
c. Those cases in which the final ṣ becomes ṭ before su (e.g. dviṭsú: 226 b) do not, of
course, fall under this rule.
198. In the other (comparatively infrequent) cases where a dental is preceded by a lingual
in internal combination, the dental (except of su loc. pl.) becomes lingual. Thus:
a. A n following immediately a ṇ made such by the rule given at 189, above—or, as it may
be expressed, a double as well as a single n—is subject to the lingualization: thus, the
participles arṇṇá, kṣuṇṇa, kṣviṇṇa, chṛṇṇá, tṛṇṇá; and, after prefixes (185 a), niṣaṇṇa, pariviṇṇa,
viṣaṇṇa, váṣyaṇṇa. But TS. has ádhiṣkanna, and RV. yájuḥ ṣkannám.
b. Only a very few other instances occur: ī́ṭṭe and ā́iṭṭa from √īḍ; ṣaḍḍhā́ (also ṣaḍdhā́ and
ṣoḍhā́), and ṣaṇṇā́m (ṣaṣ + nām: anomalous gen. pl. of ṣaṣ: 483). A small number of words
follow the same rule in external combination: see below, 199.
c. But tāḍhi (Vedic: √taḍ + dhi) shows loss of the final lingual after assimilation of the
dental, and compensatory lengthening.
d. Some of the cases of abnormal occurrence of ḍ are explained in a similar way, as results
of a lingualized and afterwards omitted sibilant before d: thus nīḍá from nisda, √pīḍ from pisd,
√mṛḍ from mṛsd. For words exhibiting a like change in composition, see below, 199 c.
199. In external combination—
a. A final t is directed to be assimilated to an initial lingual mute: thus, taṭ-ṭīkā, taḍ ḍayate,
taṭ-ṭhālinī, taḍ ḍhāukate: but the case never occurs in the older language, and very rarely in
the later. For final n before a lingual, see 205 b.
b. An initial dental after a final lingual usually remains unchanged; and su of the loc. pl.
follows the same rule: thus, ṣáṭtriṅçat, ā́naḍ diváḥ, ekarā́ṭ tvám; ṣaṭsú, rāṭsú.
c. Exceptions are: a few compounds with ṣaṣ six showing double ṇ (198 b): namely,
ṣáṇṇavati, ṣaṇṇābhi (and one or two others not quotable): IB. has ṣaṇ ṇiramimīta.
d. In a few compounds, moreover, there appears a lingualized dental, with compensatory
lengthening, after a lost lingual sibilant or its represen-

199-]
68
III. Euphonic Combination.
tative: namely, in certain Vedic compounds with dus: dūḍábha, dūḍā́ç, dūḍhī́, dūṇáça, dūṇā́ça
(compare the anomalous puroḍā́ç and -ḍā́ça: puras + √dāç); and, in the language of every
period, certain compounds of ṣaṣ, with change of its vowel to an alterant quality (as in voḍhum
and soḍhum: 224 b): ṣóḍaça, ṣoḍhā́ (also ṣaḍḍhā́ and ṣaḍdhā́), ṣoḍant.
e. Between final ṭ and initial s, the insertion of a t is permitted—or, according to some
authorities, required: thus, ṣáṭ sahásrāḥ or ṣáṭt sahásrāḥ.
200. The cases of assimilation of a dental to a contiguous palatal occur almost only in
external combination, and before an initial palatal. There is but one case of internal
combination, namely:
201. A न् n coming to follow a palatal mute in internal combination is itself made palatal.
Thus, yācñā́ (the only instance after c), yajñá, jajñé, ajñata, rā́jñā, rā́jñī.
202. a. A final त् t before an initial palatal mute is assimilated to it, becoming च् c before च्
c or छ ch, and ज् j before ज् j ( jh does not occur).
Thus, uc carati, etac chattram, vidyuj jāyate; yātayájjana, vidyujjihva, bṛhácchandas,
saccarita.
b. A final न् n is assimilated before ज् j, becoming ञ् ñ.
c. All the grammarians, of every period, require this assimilation of n ot j; but it is more
often neglected, or only occasionally made, in the manuscripts.
d. For n before a surd palatal, see below, 208.
203. Before the palatal sibilant  ç, both त् t and न् n are assimilated, becoming respectively
च् c and ञ् ñ; and then the following  ç may be, and in practice almost always is, converted to
छ ch.
Thus, vedavic chūraḥ (-vit çū-), tac chrutvā, hṛcchaya (hṛt + çaya); bṛhañ cheṣaḥ or çeṣaḥ,
svapañ chete or çete.
a. Some authorities regard the conversion of ç to ch after t or n as everywhere obligatory,
others as only optional; some except, peremptorily or optionally, a ç followed by a mute. And
some require the same conversion after every mute save m, reading also vípāṭ chutudrī́, ā́naṭ
chúci, anuṣṭup chāradī, çuk chuci. The manuscripts generally write ch, instead of cch, as result
of the combination of t and ç.
b. In the MS., t and ç are anomalously combined into ñ ç: e.g. táñ çatám, etāvañçás.

69
[-207
Combination of Final n.
Combinations of final न् n.
204. Final radical n is assimilated in internal combination to a following sibilant, becoming
anusvāra.
Thus, váṅsi, váṅsva, váṅsat, maṅsyáte, jíghāṅsati.
a. According to the grammarians, it is treated before bh and su in declension as in external
combination. But the cases are, at best, excessively rare, and RV. has ráṅsu and váṅsu (the only
Vedic examples).
b. Final n of a derivative suffix is regularly and usually dropped before a consonant in
inflection and composition—in composition, even before a vowel; and a radical n occasionally
follows the same rule: see 421 a, 439, 1203 c, 637.
c. For assimilation of n to a preceding palatal, see 201.
The remaining cases are those of external combination.
205. a. The assimilation of n in external combination to a following sonant palatal and the
palatal sibilant ç have been already treated (202 b, 203).
b. The n is also declared to be assimilated (becoming ṇ) before a sonant lingual (ḍ, ḍh, ṇ),
but the case rarely if ever occurs.
206. A n is also assimilated to a following initial l, becoming (like m: 213 d) a nasal l.
a. The manuscripts to a great extent disregard this rule, leaving n unchanged; but also they
in part attempt to follow it—and that, either by writing the assimilated n (as the assimilated m,
213 f, and just as reasonably) with the anusvāra-sign, or else by doubling the l and putting a
sign of nasality above; the latter, however, is inexact, and a better way would be to represent
the two l's, writing the first with virāma and a nasal sign above. Thus (from trīn lokān):
manuscripts लोकान् or ोकान्; better ील्◌ँ लोकान्.
The second of these methods is the one oftenest followed in printed texts.
207. Before the lingual and dental sibilants, ṣ and s, final n remains unchanged; but a t
may also be inserted between the nasal and the sibilant: thus, tā́n ṣáṭ or tā́nt ṣáṭ; mahā́n sán
or mahā́nt sán.
a. According to most of the grammarians of the Prātiçākhyas (not RPr.), the insertion of the
t in such cases is a necessary one. In the manuscripts it is very frequently made, but not
uniformly. It is probably a purely phonetic phenomenon, a transition-sound to ease the double
change of sonant to surd and nasal to non-nasal utterance—although the not infrequent cases in
which final n stands for original nt (as bharan, abharan, agnimān) may have aided to establish
it as a rule. Its analogy with the conversion of n ç into ñch (203) is palpable.

208. Before the surd palatal, lingual, and dental mutes, there is inserted after final n a
sibilant of each of those classes respectively, before which the n becomes anusvāra: thus,
devāṅç ca, bhavāṅç chidyate, kumārāṅs trīn, abharaṅs tataḥ, dadhaṅç (425 c) carum.
a. This rule, which in the classical language has established itself in the form here given, as
a phonetic rule of unvarying application, really involves a historic survival. The large majority of
cases of final n in the language (not far from three quarters) are for original ns; and the
retention of the sibilant in such cases, when once its historic ground had been forgotten, was
extended by analogy to all others.
b. Practically, the rule applies only to n before c and t, since cases involving the other
initials occur either not at all, or only with extreme rarity (the Veda does not present an
example of any of them). In the Veda, the insertion is not always made, and the different texts
have with regard to its different usages, which are fully explained in the Prātiçākhyas; in
general, it is less frequent in the older texts. When the ç does not appear between n and c, the
n is of course assimilated, becoming ñ (203).
209. The same retention of original final s after a nasal, and consequent treatment of
(apparent) final ān, īn, ūn, ṝn as if they were āṅs, īṅs, ūṅs, ṝṅs (long nasalized vowel with final
s), shows itself also in other Vedic forms of combination, which, for the sake of unity, may be
briefly stated here together:
a. Final ān becomes āṅ (nasalized ā) before a following vowel: that is to say, āṅs, with a
nasal vowel, is treated like ās, with pure vowel (177): thus, devā́ṅ é ’há, úpabaddhāṅ ihá,
mahā́ṅ asi. This is an extremely common case, especially in RV. Once or twice, the s appears as
ḥ before p; thus, svátavāṅḥ pāyúḥ.
b. In like manner, s is treated after nasal ī, ū, ṝ as it would be after those vowels when
pure, becoming r before a sonant sound (174), and (much more rarely) ḥ before a surd (170):
thus, raçmī́ṅr iva, sūnū́ṅr yuvanyū́ṅr út, nṝ́ṅr abhí; nṝ́ṅḥ pā́tram (and nṝ́ṅṣ p-, MS.).
c. RV. has once -īṅ before y. MS. usually has aṅ instead of āṅ.
210. The nasals n, ṇ, n̄, occurring as finals after a short vowel, are doubled before any
initial vowel: thus, pratyán̄n̄ úd eṣi, udyánn ādityáḥ, āsánn-iṣu.
a. This is also to be regarded as a historical survival, the second nasal being an assimilation
of an original consonant following the first. It is always written in the manuscripts, although the
Vedic metre seems to show a duplication was sometimes omitted. The RV. has the compound
vṛṣaṇaçva.
211. The nasals ñ and ṇ before a sibilant are allowed to insert respectively k and ṭ—as n
(207) inserts t: thus, pratyán̄k sómaḥ.

Combinations of final म् m.
212. Final radical म् m, in internal combination, is assimilated to a following mute or spirant
—in the later case, becoming anusvāra; in the former, becoming the nasal of the same class
with the mute.
a. Before m or v (as when final: 143 a), it is changed to n: thus, from √gam come áganma,
aganmahi, ganvahi, jaganvā́ṅs (which appear to be the only quotable cases). According to the
grammarians, the same change is made in the inflection of root-stems before bh and su: thus,
praçānbhis, praçānsu (from praçām: pra + √çam). No derived noun-stem ends in m.
b. The ÇB. and KÇS. have kámvant and çāmvant, and CbU. has kamvara.
213. Final म् m in external combination is a servile sound, being assimilated to any following
consonant. Thus:
a. It remains unchanged only before a vowel or labial mute.
b. But also, by an anomalous exception, before r of the root rāj in samrā́j and its derivatives
samrā́jñī and sāmrājya.
c. Before a mute of any other class than labial, it becomes a nasal of that class.
d. Before the semivowels y, l, v it becomes, according to the Hindu grammarians, a nasal
semivowel, the nasal counterpart of each respectively (see 71).
e. Before r, a sibilant, or h, it becomes anusvāra (see 71).
f. The manuscripts and the editions in general make no attempt to distinguish the nasal
tones produced by the assimilation of m before a following semivowel from that before a
spirant.
g. But if h be immediately followed by another consonant (which can only be a nasal or
semivowel), the m is allowed to be assimilated to that following consonant. This is because the
h has no position of the mouth-organs peculiar to itself, but is uttered in the position of the
next sound. The Prātiçākhyas do not take any notice of the case.
h. Cases are met with in the Veda where a final m appears to be dropped before a vowel,
the final and initial vowels being then combined into one. The pada-text then generally gives a
wrong interpretation. Thus, saṁvánano ’bhayaṁkarám (RV. viii. 1. 2; pada-text: -nanā ubh-; SV.
-nanam).
i. It has been pointed out above (73) that the assimilated m is generally represented in texts
by the anusvāra-sign, and that in this work it is transliterated by ṁ (instead of a nasal mute or
ṅ).

The palatal mutes and sibilant, and  h.
214. These sounds show in some situations a reversion (43) to the original gutturals from
which they are derived. The treatment of j and h, also, is different, according as they represent
the one or the other of two different degrees of alteration from their originals.
215. The palatals and h are the least stable of alphabetic sounds, undergoing, in virtue of
their derivative character, alteration in many cases where other similar sounds are retained.
216. Thus, in derivation, even before vowels, semivowels; and nasals, reversion to guttural
form is by no means rare. The cases are the following:
a. Before a of suffix a, final c becomes k in an̄ká, çvan̄ka, arká, pāká, vāká, çúka, parka,
marká, vṛ́ka, prátīka etc., reka, séka, moka, roká, çóka, toká, mroká, vraská;—final j becomes g
in tyāgá, bhága, bhāgá, yāga, an̄ga, bhan̄gá, san̄ga, svan̄ga, ṛñga, tun̄ga, yun̄ga, varga, mārga,
mṛgá, varga, sarga, nega, vega, bhóga, yugá, yóga, loga, róga;—final h becomes gh in aghá,
maghá, arghá, dīrghá (and drā́ghīyas, drā́ghiṣṭa), degha, meghá, ogha, dógha, drógha, mógha;
and in dúghāna and méghamāna. In neka (√nij) we have further an anomalous substitution of a
surd for the final sonant of the root.
b. In another series of derivatives with a, the altered sound appears: examples are ajá, yāja,
çucá, çoca, vrajá, vevijá, yuja, ūrjā́, dóha.
c. Before the suffixes as and ana, the guttural only rarely appears: namely, in án̄kas, ókas,
rókas, çókas, bhárgas, and in rogana; also in ābhogáya.
d. Before an i-vowel, the altered sound appears (except in ābhogí, ógīyaṅs, tigitá, mokī́,
sphigī́): thus, ājí, tují, rúci, çácī, vívici, rociṣṇú.
e. Before u, the guttural reappears, as a rule (the cases are few): thus, án̄ku, van̄kú, rekú,
bhṛ́gu, mā́rguka, raghú (and rághīyaṅs).
f. Before n, the examples of reversion are few, except of j (becoming g) before the
participial ending na (957 c): thus, rékṇas, vagnú (with the final also made sonant); and
participles bhagná, rugṇá, etc.; and apparently pṛgṇa from √pṛc.
g. Before m (of ma, man, mant, min), the guttural generally appears: thus, rukmá, tigmá,
yugma, ṛ́gma (with sonant change); takmán, vákman, sákman, yugmán; rúkmant; ṛgmín and
vāgmín (with sonant change):—but ájman, ojmán, bhujmán.
h. Before y, the altered sound is used: thus, pacya, yajya, yajyu, yujya, bhujyu. Such cases
as bhogya, yogya, negya, okya are doubtless secondary derivatives from bhoga etc.

i. Before r, the cases are few, and the usage apparently divided: thus, takra, sakra, vakrá,
çukrá, vigrá, ugrá, túgra, mṛgra, ván̄kri; but vájra and pajrá (?).
j. Before v (of the suffixes va, van, vin, etc., and participial vāṅs) the guttural is regularly
preserved: thus, ṛkvá, pakvá, vákva; vákvan, ṛ́kvan, rikvan, çukvan, mṛgvan, túgvan, yugvan;
ṛ́kvant, pṛ́kvant; vāgvín, vagvaná, vagvanú (with further sonant change); vivakvā́ṅs, ririkvā́ṅs,
vivikvā́ṅs, rurukvā́ṅs, çuçukvā́ṅs; çuçukvaná, çuçukváni: also before the union-vowel i in okivā́ṅs
(RV., once). An exception is yájvan.
k. The reversion of h in derivation is comparatively rare. The final j which is analogous with
ç (219) shows much less proclivity to reversion than that which corresponds with c.
l. A like reversion shows itself also to some extent in conjugational stem-formation and
inflection. Thus, the initial radical becomes guttural after the reduplication in the present or
perfect or desiderative or intensive stems, or in derivatives, of the roots ci, cit, ji, hi, han, and
in jáguri (√jṛ); and han becomes ghn on the elision of a (402, 637). The RV. has vivakmi from
√vac and vāvakre from √vañc; and SV. has sasṛgmahe (RV. -sṛj-). And before ran etc. of 3d pl.
mid. we have g for radical j in asṛgran, asṛgram, asasṛgram (all in RV.).
217. Final च् c of a root or stem, if followed in internal combination by any other sound
than a vowel or semivowel or nasal, reverts (43) to its original guttural value, and shows
everywhere the same form which a क k would show in the same situation.
Thus, vákti, uváktha, vákṣi, vakṣyā́mi, vaghdi; vhāgbhís, vākṣú; uktá, ukthá, vaktár.
a. And, as final c becomes k (above 142), the same rule applies also to c in external
combination: thus, vā́k ca, vā́g ápi, vā́n̄ me.
Examples of c remaining unchanged in inflection are: ucyáte, riricré, vācí, mumucmáhe.
217. Final  ç reverts to its original क k, in internal combination, only before the स् s of a
verbal stem or ending (whence, by 180,  kṣ); before त् t and थ् th, it everywhere becomes ष् ṣ
(whence, by 197,  ṣṭ and  ṣṭh); before ध् dh, भ् bh, and सु su of the loc. pl., as when final
(145), it regularly becomes the lingual mute (ट ṭ or ड ḍ).
Thus, ávikṣata, vekṣyā́mi; váṣṭi, viṣṭá, dídeṣḍu; didiḍḍhi, viḍbhís.

a. But a few roots exhibit the reversions of final ç to k before bh and su, and also when
final (145): they are diç, dṛç, spṛç, and optionally naç; and viç has in V. always vikṣú, loc. pl.,
but víṭ, viḍbhís, etc. Examples are díksaṁçita, dṛgbhís, hṛdispṛ́k, nák (or naṭ).
Examples of ç remaining unchanged before vowels etc. are : viçí, viviçyās, aviçran, açnomi,
vacmi, uçmási.
b. A ç remains irregularly unchanged before p in the compound viçpáti.
219. Final ज् j is in one set of words treated like च् c, and in another set like  ç.
Thus, from yuj: áyukthās, áyukta, yun̄kté, yukti, yóktra, yokṣyā́mi, yukṣú; yun̄gdhí,
áyugdhvam, yugbhís.
Again, from mṛj etc.: ámṛkṣat, srakṣyā́mi; mā́rṣṭhi, mṛṣṭá, sṛ́ṣṭi, rāṣṭrá; mṛḍḍhí, mṛḍḍhavám,
rāḍbhís, rāṭsú, rā́ṭ.
a. To the former or yuj-class belong (as shown by their quotable forms) about twenty roots
and radical stems: namely, bhaj, saj, tyaj (not V.), raj 'color, svaj, majj, nij, tij, vij, 1 and 2 bhuj,
yuj, ruj, vṛj, añj, bhañj, çiñj; ū́rj, sráj, bhiṣáj, ásṛj;—also, stems formed with the suffixes aj and ij
(383. IV), as tṛṣṇáj, vaṇíj; and ṛtvíj, though containing the root yaj.
b. To the latter or mṛj-class belong only about one third as many: namely, yaj, bhrajj, vraj,
rāj, bhrāj, mṛj, sṛj.
c. A considerable number of j-roots are not placed in circumstances to exhibit the
distinction; but such roots are in part assignable to one or the class on the evidence of the
related languages. The distinction appears, namely, only when the j occurs as final, or is
followed, either in inflection or derivation, by a dental mute (t, th, dh), or, in noun-inflection, by
bh or su. In derivation (above, 216) we find a g sometimes from the mṛj-class: thus mārga,
sárga, etc.; and (2161) before Vedic mid. endings, sasṛgmahe, asṛgran, etc. (beside sasṛjrire)—
while from the yuj-class occur only yuyujre, ayujran, bubhujrire, with j. And MS. has viçvasṛ́k
from (√sṛj).
220. Final ch falls under the rules of combination almost only in the root prach, in which it
is treated as if it were ç (praç being, indeed, its more original form): thus, prakṣyā́mi, pṛṣṭá,
and also the derivative praçná. As final and in noun-inflection (before bh and su), it is changed
to the lingual mute: thus, prāḍvivāka.
a. Mūrtá is called the participle of mūrch, and a gerund mūrtvā́ is given to the same root.
They (with mū́rti) must doubtless come from a simpler form of the root.
b. Of jh there is no occurrence: the grammarians require it to be treated like c.

221. The compound kṣ is not infrequent as final of a root (generally of demonstrably
secondary origin), or of a tense-stem (s-aorist: see below, 878 ff.); and, in the not very frequent
cases of its internal combination, it is treated as if a single sound, following the rules for ç:
thus çákṣe (cakṣ + se), cákṣva; cáṣṭe, ácaṣṭa, ásrāṣṭam, ásṛṣṭa, tváṣṭar. As to its treatment
when final, see 146.
a. Thus, we are taught by the grammarians to make such forms as goráṭ, goráḍbhis, goráṭṣu
(from gorákṣ); and we actually have ṣáṭ, ṣaḍbhís, ṣaṭsú from ṣakṣ or ṣaṣ (146 b). For jagdha
etc. from √jakṣ, see 233 f.
b. In the single anomalous root vraçc, the compound çc is said to follow the rules for simple
ç. From it are quotable the future vrakṣyáti, the gerunds vṛṣṭvā́ (AV.) and vṛktvī́ (RV.), and the
participle (957 c) vṛkṇá. Its c reverts to k in the derivative vraska.
222. The roots in final  h, like those in ज् j, fall into two classes, exhibiting a similar
diversity of treatment, appearing in the same kinds of combination.
a. In the one class, as duh, we have a reversion of h (as of c) to a guttural form, and its
treatment as if it were still its original gh: thus, ádhukṣam, dhokṣyā́mi; dugdhā́m, dugdhá;
ádhok, dhúk, dhugbhís, dhukṣú.
b. In the other cases, as ruh and sah, we have a guttural reversion (as of ç) only before s in
verb-formations and derivation: thus, árukṣat, rokṣyā́mi, sākṣiyá, sakṣáṇi. As final, in external
combination, and in noun-inflection before bh and su, the h (like ç) becomes a lingual mute:
thus, turāṣā́ṭ, pṛtanāṣā́ḍ ayodhyáḥ, turāsā́ḍbhis, turāsā́ṭsu. But before a dental mute (t, th, dh) in
verb-inflection and in derivation, its euphonic effect is peculiarly complicated: in turns the
dental into a lingual (as would ç); but it also makes it sonant and aspirate (as would ḍh: see
160); and further, it disappears itself, and the preceding vowel, if short, is lengthened: thus,
from ruh with ta comes rūḍhá, from leh with ti comes léḍhi, from guh with tar comes gūḍhár,
from meh with tum comes méḍhum, from lih with tas or thas comes līḍhás, from lih with
dhvam comes līḍhvám, etc.
c. This is as if we had to assume as transition sound a sonant aspirate lingual sibilant ṣh,
with the euphonic effects of a lingual and of a sonant aspirate (160), itself disappearing under
the law of the existing language which admits no sonant sibilant.
223. The roots of the two classes, as shown in their forms found in use, are:
a. of the first or duh-class: dah, dih, duh, druh, snuh, snih (and the final of uṣṇíh is
similarly treated);

b. of the second or ruh-class: vah, sah, mih, rih or lih, guh, ruh, dṛṅh, tṛṅh, bṛh, baṅh, spṛh
(?).
c. But muh forms also (not in RV.) the participle mūḍha and agent-noun mūḍhár, as well as
mugdhá and mugdhár; and druh and snih are allowed by the grammarians to do likewise: such
forms as drūḍha and snīḍha, however, have not been met with in use.
d. From roots of the ruh-class we find also in the Veda the forms gartārúk, nom. sing., and
prāṇadhṛ́k and dadhṛ́k; and hence puruspṛ́k (the only occurrence) does not certainly prove √spṛh
to be of the duh-class.
e. A number of other h-roots are not proved by their occurring forms to belong to either
class; they, too, are with more or less confidence assigned to the one or the other by
comparison with the related languages.
f. In derivation, before certain suffixes (216), we have gh instead of h from verbs of either
class.
g. The root nah comes from original dh instead of gh, and its reversion is accordingly to a
dental mute: thus, natsyā́mi, naddhá, upānádbhis, upānadyuga, anupānatka. So also the root
grah comes from (early Vedic) grabh, and shows labials in many forms and derivatives (though
it is assimilated to other h-roots in the desiderative stem jighṛkṣa). In like manner, h is used
for dh in some of the forms and derivatives of √dvā put; and further analogous facts are the
stem kakuhá beside kakubhá, the double imperative ending dhi and hi, and the dative máhyam
beside túbhyam (491).
224. Irregularities of combination are:
a. The vowel ṛ is not lengthened after the loss of the h-element: thus, dṛḍhá, tṛḍhá, bṛḍhá
(the only cases; and in the Veda their first syllable has metrical value as heavy or long).
b. The roots vah and sah change their vowel to o instead of lengthening it: thus, voḍhám,
voḍhā́m, voḍhár, sóḍhum. But from sah in the older language forms with ā are more frequent:
thus, sāḍhá, áṣāḍha (also later), sā́ḍhar. The root tṛṅh changes the vowel of its class-sign na
into e instead of lengthening it: thus, tṛṇeḍhi, tṛṇéḍhu, atṛṇet (the grammarians teach also
tṛṇehmi and tṛṇekṣi: but no such forms are quotable, and, if ever actually in use, they must
have been made by false analogy with others).
c. These anomalous vowel-changes seem to stand in connection with the fact that the cases
showing them are the only ones where other than an alterant vowel (180) comes before the
lingualized sibilant representative of the h. Compare ṣóḍaça etc.
d. Apparently by dissimilation, the final of vah in anomalous compound anaḍvah is changed
to d instead of ḍ: see 404.

The lingual sibilant ष् ṣ.
225. Since the lingual sibilant, in its usual and normal occurrences, is (182) the product of
lingualization of s after certain alterant sounds, we might expect final radical ṣ, when (in rare
cases) it comes to stand where a ṣ cannot maintain itself, to revert to its original, and be
treated as a s would be treated under the same circumstances. That, however, is true only in a
very few instances.
a. Namely, in the prefix dus (evidently identical with √duṣ); in sajū́s (adverbially used case-
form from √juṣ); in (RV.) vivés and ávives, from √viṣ; in āíyes (RV.), from √īṣ; and in āçís, from
çiṣ as secondary form of √çās. All these, except the first two, are more or less open in question.
226. In general, final lingual ष् ṣ, in internal combination, is treated in the same manner as
palatal  ç. Thus:
a. Before t and th it remains unchanged, and the latter are assimilated: e.g. dviṣṭas,
dviṣṭhas, dvéṣṭum.
This is a common and perfectly natural combination.
b. Before dh, bh, and su, as also in external combination (145), it becomes a lingual mute:
and dh is made lingual after it: e.g. piṇḍḍhi, viḍḍhi, viviḍḍhi, dviḍḍhvam, dviḍbhís, dviṭsú;
bhinnaviṭka.
c. So also the dh of dhvam as ending of 2d pl. mid. becomes ḍh after final ṣ of a tense-
stem, whether the ṣ be regarded as lost or as converted to ḍ before it (the manuscripts write
simply ḍhv, not ḍḍhv; but this is ambiguous: see 232). Thus, after ṣ of s-aorist stems (881 a),
astoḍhvam, avṛḍhvam, cyoḍhvam (the only quotable cases), from astoṣ + dhvam etc.; but
arādhvam from arās + dhvam. Further, after the ṣ of iṣ-aorist stems (901 a), āindhiḍhvam,
artiḍhvam, ajaniḍhvam, vepiḍhvam (the only quotable cases), from ajaniṣ + dhvam etc. Yet
again, in the precative (924), as bhaviṣīḍhvam, if, as is probable (unfortunately, no example of
this person is quotable from any part of the literature), the precative-sign s (ṣ) is to be
regarded as present in the form. According, however, to the Hindu grammarians, the use of ḍh
or of dh in the iṣ-aorist and precative depends on whether the i of iṣ or of iṣī is or is not
“preceded by a semivowel or h”—which both in itself appears senseless and is opposed to the
evidence of all the quotable forms. Moreover, the same authorities prescribed the change of dh
to ḍh under the same restriction as to circumstances, in the perf. mid. ending dhve also: in this
case, too, without any conceivable reason; and no example of ḍhve in the 2d pl. perf. has been
pointed out in the literature.
d. The conversion of ṣ to ṭ (or ḍ) as final and before bh and su is parallel with the like
conversion of ç, and of j and h in the mṛj and

ruh classes of roots, and perhaps with the occasional change of s to t (167–8). It is a very
infrequent case, occurring (save as it may be assumed in the case of ṣaṣ) only once in the RV.
and once in the AV. (-dviṭ and -pruṭ), although those texts have more than 40 roots with final ṣ;
in the Brāhmaṇas, moreover, have been noticed further only -pruṭ and víṭ (ÇB.), and -çliṭ (K.).
From piṅṣ, RV. has the anomalous form piṇak (2d and 3d sing., for pinaṣ-s and pinaṣ-t).
e. Before s in internal combination (except su of loc. pl.) it becomes k: thus, dvékṣi,
dvekṣyā́mi, ádvikṣam.
f. This change is of anomalous phonetic character, and difficult of explanation. It is also
practically of very rare occurrence. The only RV. examples (apart from piṇak, above) are
vivekṣi, from √viṣ, and the desid. stem ririkṣa from √riṣ; AV. has only dvikṣat and dvikṣata, and
the desid. stem çiçlikṣa from √çliṣ. Other examples are quotable from √√kṛṣ and piṣ and viṣ
(ÇB. etc.), and çiṣ (ÇB.); and they are by the Hindu grammarians prescribed to be formed from
about half-a-dozen other roots.
Extension and Abbreviation.
227. As a general rule, ch is not allowed by the grammarians to stand in that form after a
vowel, but is to be doubled, becoming cch (which the manuscripts sometimes write chch).
a. The various authorities disagree with one another in detail as to this duplication.
According to Pāṇini, ch is doubled within a word after either a long or a short vowel; and, as
initial, necessarily after a short and after the particles ā́ and mā́, and optionally everywhere
after a long. In RV., initial ch is doubled after a long vowel of ā́ only, and certain special cases
after a short vowel are excepted. For the required usage in the other Vedic texts, see their
several Prātiçākhyas. The Kāṭhaka writes for original ch (not ch from combination of t or n
with ç: 203) after a vowel everywhere çch. The manuscripts in general write simple ch.
b. Opinions are still at variance as to how far this duplication has an etymological ground,
and how far it is only an acknowledgment of the fact that ch makes a heavy syllable even after
a short vowel (makes “position”: 79). As the duplication is accepted and followed by most
European scholars, it will be also adopted in this work in words and sentences (not in roots
and stems).
228. After r, any consonant (save a spirant before a vowel) is by the grammarians either
allowed or required to be doubled (an aspirate, by prefixing the corresponding non-aspirate:
154).
Thus:
अक arka, or अ arkka; काय kārya, or का kāryya;
अथ artha, or अ arttha; दीघ dīrgha, or दीघ dīrggha.

a. Some of the authorities include, along with r, also h or l or v, or more than one of them,
in this rule.
b. A doubled consonant after r is very common in manuscripts and inscriptions, as also in
native text-editions and in the earlier editions prepared by European scholars—in later ones, the
duplication is universally omitted.
c. On the other hand, the manuscripts often write a single consonant after r where a double
one is etymologically required: thus, kārtikeya, vārtika, for kaārttikeya, vārttika.
229. The first consonant of a group—whether interior, or initial after a vowel of a preceding
word—is by the grammarians either allowed or required to be doubled.
a. This duplication is allowed by Pāṇini and required by the Prātiçākhyas—in both, with
mention of authorities who deny it altogether. For certain exceptions, see the Prātiçākhyas; the
meaning of the whole matter is too obscure to justify the giving of details here.
230. Other cases of extension of consonant-groups, required by some of the grammatical
authorities, are the following:
a. Between a non-nasal and a nasal mute, the insertion of so-called yamas ( twins), or nasal
counterparts, is taught by the Prātiçākhyas (and assumed in Pāṇini’s commentary): see APr. i.
99, note.
b. Between h and a following nasal mute the Prātiçākhyas teach the insertion of a nasal
sound called a nāsikya: see APr. i. 100, note.
c. Between r and a following nasal consonant the Prātiçākhyas teach the insertion of a
svarabhakti or vowel-fragment: see APr. i. 101–2, note.
d. Some authorities assume this insertion only before a spirant; the others regard it as twice
as long before a spirant as before any other consonant—namely, a half or a quarter mora
before the former, a quarter or an eight before the latter. One (VPr.) admits it after l as well
as r. It is variously described as a fragment of the vowel a or of ṛ (or ḷ).
e. The RPr. puts a svarabhakti also between a sonant consonant and a following mute or
spirant; and APr. introduces an element called sphoṭana (distinguisher) between a guttural and
a preceding mute of another class.
f. For one or two other cases of yet more doubtful value, see the Prātiçākhyas.
231. After a nasal, the former of two non-nasal mutes may be dropped, whether
homogeneous only with the nasal, or with both: thus, yun̄dhí for yun̄gdhí, yun̄dhvám for
yun̄gdhvám, ān̄tám for ān̄ktám, pan̄tí for pan̄ktí, chintā́m for chinttā́m, bhinthá for bhintthá,
indhé for inddhé.
a. The abbreviation, allowed by Pāṇini, is required by APr. (the other Prātiçākhyas take no
notice of it). It is the more usual practice of the manuscripts, though the full group is also
often written.


232. In general, a double mute (including an aspirate which is doubled by the prefixion of a
non-aspirate) in combination with any other consonant is by the manuscripts written as simple.
a. That is to say, the ordinary usage of the manuscripts makes no difference between those
groups in which a phonetic duplication is allowed by the rules given above (228, 229) and those
in which the duplication is etymological. As every tv after a vowel may also be properly written
ttv, so dattvā́ and tattvá may be, and almost invariably are, written as datvā́ and tatvá. As
kártana is also properly kárttana, so kārttika (from kṛtti) is written as kārtika. So in inflection,
we have always, for example, majñā́ etc., not majjñā́, from majján. Even in composition and
sentence-collocation the same abbreviations are made: thus, hṛdyotá for hṛddyotá; chináty asya
for chinátty asya. Hence it is impossible to determine by the evidence of written usage whether
we should regard ādhvam or āddhvam (from √ās), ádviḍhvam or ádviḍḍhvam (from √dviṣ), as
the true form of a second person plural.
233. a. Instances are sometimes met with of apparent loss (perhaps after conversion to a
semivowel) of i or u before y or v respectively. Thus, in the Brāhmaṇas, tú and nú with
following vāí etc. often made tvāí, nvāí (also tvā́vá, ánvāí); and other examples from the older
language are anvart- (anu + √vart); paryan, paryanti, paryāyāt, paryāṇa (pari + yan, etc.);
abhyàrti (abhi + iyarti); antaryāt (antar + iyāt); cārvāc, cārvāka, cārvadana (cāru + vāc, etc.);
kyànt for kíyant; dvyoga (dvi + yoga); anvā, anvāsana (anu + vā, etc.); probably vyùnoti for ví
yunoti (RV.), urváçī (uru-vaçī), çíçvarī for çíçu-varī (RV.); vyāmá (vi + yāma); and the late svarṇa
for suvarṇa. More anomalous abbreviations are the common tṛcá (tri + ṛca); and dvṛca (dvi +
ṛca: S.) and treṇī (tri + eṇī: Āpast.).
Further, certain cases of the loss of a sibilant require notice. Thus:
b. According to the Hindu grammarians, the s of s-aorist stems is lost after a short vowel in
the 2d and 3d sing. middle: thus, adithās and adita (1st sing. adiṣi), akṛthās and akṛta (1st sing.
akṛṣi). It is, however, probably that such cases are to be explained in a different manner: see
834 a.
c. The s between two mutes is lost in all combinations of the roots sthā and stambh with
the prefix ud: thus, út thus, útthita, út thāpaya, úttabdha, etc.
d. The same omission is now and then made in other similar cases: thus cit kámbhanena
(for skámbh-: RV.); tasmāt tute (for stute) and puroruk tuta (for stuta: K.); the compounds ṛkthā
(ṛk + sthā: PB.) and utphulin̄ga; the derivative utphāla (√sphal). On the other hand, we may
have vidyút stanáyantī (RV.), utsthala, kakutstha, etc.
e. So also the tense-sign of the s-aorist is lost after a final consonant of a root before the
initial consonant of an ending: thus, achāntta

(and for this, by 231, achānta) for achāntsta, çāpta for çāpsta, tāptam for tāpstam, abhākta for
abhāksta, amāuktam for amāukstam. These are the only quotable cases: compare 883.
f. A final s of root or tense-stem is in a few instances lost after a sonant aspirate, and the
combination of mutes is then made as if no sibilant had ever intervened. Thus, from the root
ghas, with omission of the vowel and then of the final sibilant, we have the form gdha (for ghs-
ta: 3d sing. mid.), the participle gdha (in agdhā́d), and the derivative ghdi (for ghs-ti; in sá-
gdhi); and further, from the reduplicated form of the same root, or √jakṣ, we have jagdha,
jagdhum, jagdhvā, jagdhi (from jaghs-ta etc.); also, in like manner, from baps, reduplication of
bhas, the form babdhām (for babhs-tām). According to the Hindu grammarians, the same utter
loss of the aorist-sign s takes place after a final sonant aspirate of a root before an ending
beginning with t or th: thus, from √rudh, s-aorist stem arāuts act. and aruts mid., come the
active dual and plural persons arāuddham and arāuddhām and arāuddha, and the middle
singular persons aruddhās and aruddha. None of the active forms, however, have been found
quotable from the literature, ancient or modern; and the middle forms admit also of a different
explanation: see 834, 883.
Strengthening and Weakening Processes.
234. Under this head, we take up first the changes that affect vowels, and then those that
affect consonants—adding for convenience’s sake, in each case, a brief notice of the vowel and
consonant elements that have come to bear the apparent office of connectives.
Guṇa and Vṛddhi.
255. The so-called guṇa and vṛddhi-changes are the most regular and frequent of vowel-
changes, being of constant occurrence both in inflection and in derivation.
a. A guṇa-vowel (guṇa secondary quality) differs from the corresponding simple vowel by a
prefixed a-element which is combined with the other according to the usual rules; a vṛddhi-
vowel (vṛddhi growth, increment), by the further prefixion of a to the guṇa-vowel. Thus, of इ i or
ई ī the corresponding guṇa is (a+i=) ए e; the corresponding vṛddhi is (a+e=) ऐ āi. But in all
gunating processes अ a remains unchanged—or, as it is sometimes expressed,

अ a is its own guṇa; आ ā, of course, remains unchanged for both guṇa and vṛddhi.
236. The series of corresponding degrees is then as follows:
simple vowel
a ā
i ī
u ū
ṛ
ḷ
guṇa
a ā
e
o
ar
al
vṛddhi
ā
āi
āu
ār
a. There is nowhere any occurrence of ṝ in a situation to undergo either guṇa or vṛddhi-
change; nor does ḷ (26) ever suffer change to vṛddhi. Theoretically, ṝ would have the same
changes as ṛ; and the vṛddhi of ḷ would be āl.
b. In secondary derivatives requiring vṛddhi of the first syllable (1204), the o of go (361 c)
is strengthened to gāu: thus, gāumata, gāuṣṭhika.
237. The historical relations of the members of each vowel-series are still matters of some
difference of opinion. From the special point of view of the Sanskrit, the simple vowels wear
the aspect of being in general the original or fundamental ones, and the others of being
products of their increment or strengthening, in two several degrees—so that the rules of
formation direct a, i, u, ṛ, ḷ to be raised to guṇa or vṛddhi respectively, under specified
conditions. But ṛ has long been so clearly seen to come by abbreviation or weakening from an
earlier ar (or ra) that many European grammarians have preferred to treat the guṇa-forms as
the original and the other as the derivative. Thus, for example: instead of assuming certain
roots to be bhṛ and vṛdh, and making from them bharati and vardhati, and bhṛta and vṛddha,
by the same rules from which bhū and nī and from budh and cit form bhavati and nayati,
bodhati, and cetati, bhūta and nīta, buddha and citta—they assume bhar and vardh to be the
roots, and give the rules of formation for them in reverse. In this work, as already stated (104
e), the ṛ-form is preferred.
238. The guṇa-increment is an Indo-European phenomenon, and is in many cases seen to
occur in connection with an accent on the increased syllable. It is found—
a. In root-syllables: either in inflection, as dvéṣṭi from √dviṣ, dóhmi from √duh; or in
derivation, as dvéṣa, dóhas, dvéṣṭum, dógdhum.
b. In formative elements: either conjugational class-signs, as tanómi from tanu; or suffixes of
derivation, in inflection or in further derivation, as matáye from matí, bhānávas from bhānú,
pitáram from pitṛ́ (or pitár), hantavyà from hántu.
239. The vṛddhi-increment is specifically Indian, and its occurrence is less frequent and
regular. It is found—

a. In root and suffix-syllables, instead of guṇa: thus, stāúti from √stu, sákhāyam from sákhi,
ánāiṣam from √nī, ákārṣam and kāráyati and kāryà from √kṛ (or kar), dātā́ram from dātṛ́ (or
dātár).
b. Especially often, in initial syllables in secondary derivation: thus, mānasá from mánas,
vāidyutá from vidyút, bhāumá from bhū́mi, pā́rthiva from pṛthivī́ (1204).
But—
240. The guṇa-increment does not usually take place in a heavy syllable ending with a
consonant: that is to say, the rules prescribing guṇa in processes of derivation and inflection do
not apply to a short vowel which is “long by position”, nor to a long vowel unless it be final:
thus, cétati from √cit, but níndati from √nind; náyati from √nī, but jī́vati from √jīv.
a. The vṛddhi-increment is not liable to this restriction.
b. Exceptions to the rule are occasionally met with: thus, ehá, ehas from √īh; heḍáyāmi,
héḍas, etc., from √hīḍ; coṣa etc. from √cūṣ; óhate etc. from √uh consider; and especially, from
roots in īv: didéva deviṣyati, dévana, etc., from √dīv; tiṣṭheva from √ṣṭhīv; sreváyāmi, srévuka,
from √srīv—on account of which it is, doubtless, that these roots are written with iv (div etc.)
by the Hindu grammarians, although they nowhere show a short i, in either verb-forms or
derivatives.
c. A few cases occur of prolongation instead of increment; thus, dūṣáyati from √duṣ, gū́hati
from √guh.
The changes of ṛ (more original ar or ra) are so various as to call for further description.
241. The increments of ṛ are sometimes ra and rā, instead of ar and ār: namely, especially,
where by such reversal a difficult combination of consonants is avoided: thus, from √dṛç,
drakṣyā́mi and ádrākṣam; but also pṛthú and prath, pṛch and prach, kṛpā́ and ákrapiṣṭa.
242. In a number of roots (about a dozen quotable ones) ending in ṛ (for more original ar),
the ṛ changes both with ar, and more irregularly, in a part of the forms, with ir—or also with
ur (especially after a labial, in pṛ, mṛ, vṛ, sporadically in others): which ir and ur, again, are
liable to prolongation into īr and ūr. Thus, for example, from tṛ (or tar), we have tarati, titarti,
tatāra, atāriṣam, by regular processes; but also tirati, tīryati, tīrtvā, -tīrya, tīrṇa, and even (V.)
turyāma, tuturyāt, tarturāṇa. The treatment of such roots has to be described in speaking of
each formation.
a. For the purpose of artificially indicating this peculiarity of treatment, such roots are by
the Hindu grammarians written with long ṝ, or with both r and ṝ: no ṝ actually appears
anywhere among their forms.

b. The (quotable) ṝ-roots are 2 kṛ strew, 1 gṛ sing, 2 gṛ swallow, 1 jṛ wear out, tṛ, 1 çṛ
crush.
c. The (quotable) ṛ and ṝ-roots are ṛ, 1 dṛ pierce, 1 pṛ fill, 1 mṛ die, 2 vṛ choose, stṛ , hvṛ.
d. Forms analogous with these are sometimes made also from other roots: thus, cīrṇa,
cīrtvā, carcūryá, from √car; spūrdhán and spūrdháse from √spṛdh.
243. In a few cases ṛ comes from the contraction of other syllables than ar and ra: thus, in
tṛta and tṛtīva, from ri; in çṛṇu, from ru; in bhṛkūṭi, from rū.
Vowel-lengthening.
244. Vowel-lengthening concerns especially i and u, since lengthening of a is in part (except
where in evident analogy with that of i and u) indistinguishable from its increment, and ṛ is
made long only in certain plural cases of stems in ṛ (or ar: 369 ff.). Lengthening is a much
more irregular and sporadic change than increment, and its cases will in general be left to be
pointed out in connection with the processes of inflection and derivation: a few only will be
mentioned here.
245. a. Final radical i and u are especially liable to prolongation before y: as in passive and
gerund and so on.
b. Final radical ir and ur (from variable ṛ-roots: 242) are liable to prolongation before all
consonants except those of personal endings: namely, before y and tvā and na: and in
declensions before bh and s (392). Radical is has the same prolongation in declension (392).
246. Compensatory lengthening, or absorption by a vowel of the time of a lost following
consonant, is by no means common. Certain instances of it have been pointed out above (179,
198 c, d, 199 d, 222 b). Perhaps such cases as pitā for pitars (371 a) and dhanī for dhanins
(439) are to be classed here.
247. The final vowel of a former member of a compound is often made long, especially in
the Veda. Prolongations of final a, and before v, are most frequent; but cases are found of
every variety. Examples are: devāvī́, vayunāvíd, prāvṛ́ṣ, ṛtāvasu, índrāvant, sadanāsád,
çatā́magha, viçvā́nara, ékādaça; apījū́, parīṇáh, vīrúdh, tuvīmaghá, tvíṣīmant, çáktīvant; vasūjū́,
anūrúdh, sūmáya, purūvásu.
248. In the Veda, the final vowel of a word—generally a, much less often i and u—is in a
large number of cases prolonged. Usually the prolongation takes place where it is favored by
the metre, but sometimes even where the metre opposes the change (for details, see the
various Prātiçākhyas).
Words of which the finals are thus treated are:

a. Particles: namely, áthā, ádhā, evā́, utā́, ghā́, hā, ihā́, ivā, cā, smā, nā́, an̄gā́, kílā, átrā,
yátrā, tátrā, kútrā, anyátrā, ubhayátrā, adyā́, ácchā, ápā, prā́; átī, nī́, yádī, nahī́, abhī́, vī́; ū, tū́,
nū́, sū́, makṣū́.
b. Case-forms: especially instr. sing., as enā́, ténā, yénā, svénā, and others; rarely gen. sing.,
as asyā, hariṇásyā. Cases besides these are few: so símā, vṛṣabhā, hariyojanā (voc.); tanvī̀ (loc.);
and urū́ and (not rarely) purū́.
c. Verb-forms ending in a, in great number and variety: thus (nearly in the order of their
comparative frequency), 2d sing. impv. act., as pibā, syā, gamayā, dhāráyā;—2d pl. act. in ta
and tha, as sthā, attā, bibhṛtā, jayatā, çṛṇutā, anadatā, nayathā, jīvayathā (and one or two in
tana: aviṣṭanā, hantanā);—1st pl. act. in ma, as vidmā, riṣāmā, ṛdhyāmā, ruhemā, vanuyāmā,
cakṛmā, marmṛjmā;—2d sing. impv. mid. in sva, as yukṣvā, iḍiṣvā, dadhiṣvā, vahasvā;—1st and
3d sing. perf. act., as vedā, viveçā, jagrabhā; 2d sing. perf. act., vetthā;——2d pl. perf. act.,
anajā, cakrā. Of verb-forms ending in i, only the 2d sing. impv. act.: thus, kṛdhī, kṛṇuhī́, kṣidhī́,
çrudhī, çṛṇudhī, çṛṇuhī, dīdihī, jahī.
d. To these may be added the gerund in ya (993 a), as abhigū́ryā, ā́cyā.
Vowel-lightening.
249. The alteration of short a to an i- or u-vowel in the formative processes of the language,
except in ṛ or ar roots (as explained above), is a sporadic phenomenon only.
250. But the lightening of a long ā especially to an i-vowel (as also its loss), is a frequent
process; no other vowel is so unstable.
a. Of the class-sign nā (of the krī-class of verbs: 717 ff.), the ā is in weak forms changed to
ī, and before vowel-endings dropped altogether. The final ā of certain roots is treated in the
same manner: thus, mā, hā, etc. (662–6). And from some roots, ā- and ī- or i-forms so
interchange that it is difficult to classify them or to determine the true character of the root.
b. Radical ā is weakened to the semblance of the union-vowel i in certain verbal forms: as
perfect dadima from √dā etc. (794 k); aorist adhithās from √dhā etc. (834 a); present jahimas
from √hā etc. (665).
c. Radical ā is shortened to the semblance of stem-a in a number reduplicated forms, as
tiṣṭa, piba, dada, etc.: see 671–4; also in a few aorists, as áhvam, ákhyam, etc.: see 847.
d. Radical ā sometimes becomes e, especially before y: as stheyāsam, deya.

251. Certain ā-roots, because of their peculiar exchanges with ī and i-forms, especially in
forming the present stem, are given by the Hindu grammarians as roots ending in e or āi or o.
Thus, from 2 dhā suck (dhe) come the present dháyati and participle and gerund dhītá, dhītvā́;
the other forms are made from dhā, as dadhus, adhāt, dhāsyati, dhā́tave, dhāpayati. From 2 gā
sing (gāi) come the present gā́yati, the participle and gerund gītá and gītvā́, and passive gīyáte,
and the other forms from gā. From 3 dā cut (do) come the present dyáti and participle ditá or
diná, and the other forms from dā. The irregularities of these roots will be treated below, under
the various formations (see especially 761 d ff.).
252. By a process of abbreviation essentially akin with that of ar or ra to ṛ, the va (usually
initial) of a number of roots becomes u, and the ya of a much smaller number becomes i, in
certain verbal forms and derivatives. Thus, from vac comes uvā́ca, ucyā́sam, uktvā́, uktá, uktí,
ukthá, etc.; from yaj come iyā́ja, ijyā́sam, iṣṭvā́, iṣṭá, íṣṭi, etc. See below, under the various
formations.
a. To this change is given by European grammarians the name of samprasāraṇa, by
adaptation of a term used in the native grammar.
253. A short a, of root or ending, is not infrequently lost between consonants in a weakened
syllable: thus, in verb-forms, ghnánti, ápaptam, jagmús, jajñús, ájñata; in noun-forms, rā́jñe,
rā́jñī.
254. Union-vowels. All the simple vowels come to assume in certain cases the aspect of
union-vowels, or insertions between root or stem and ending of inflection or of derivation.
a. That character belongs oftenest to i, which is very widely used: 1. before the s of aorist
and future and desiderative stems, as in ájīviṣam, jīviṣyā́mi, jíjīviṣāmi; 2. in tense-inflection,
especially perfect, as jijīvimá; occasionally also present, as ániti, róditi; 3. in derivation, as jīvitá,
khánitum, janitṛ́, rociṣṇú, etc. etc.
b. Long ī is used sometimes instead of short: thus, ágrahīṣam, grahīṣyā́mi; bravīti, vāvadīti;
tarītṛ́, savītṛ́; it is also often introduced before s and t of the 2d and 3d sing. of verbs: thus,
ā́sīs, ā́sīt.
c. For details respecting these, and the more irregular and sporadic occurrences of u- and
a-vowels in the same character, see below.
Nasal Increment.
255. Both in roots and in endings, a distinction of stronger and weaker forms is very often
made by the presence or absence of a nasal element, a nasal mute or anusvāra, before a
following consonant. In general, the stronger form is doubtless the more original; but, in the
present condition of the language, the nasal has come in great measure to seem, and to some
extent also to be used, as an actually strengthening element, introduced under certain
conditions in formative and inflective processes.

a. Examples are, of roots: ac and añc, grath and granth, vid and vind, daç and daṅç, sras
and sraṅs, dṛh and dṛṅh: of endings, bhárantam and bháratā, mánasī and mánāṅsi.
256. A final n, whether of stem or of root, is less stable than any other consonant, where a
weaker form is called for: thus, from rā́jan we have rā́jā and rā́jabhis, and in composition rāja;
from dhanín, dhanī́ and dhaníbhis and dháni; from √han we have hathá and hatá, etc. A final
radical m is sometimes treated in the same way; thus, from √gam, gahí, gatám, gatá, gáti.
257. Inserted n. On the other hand, the nasal n has come to be used with great — and, in
the later history of the language, with increasing — frequency as a union-consonant, inserted
between vowels: thus, from agní, agnínā and agnīnā́m; from mádhu, mádhunas, mádhunī,
mádhūni; from çivá, çivéna, çīvā́ni, çīvā́nām .
258. Inserted y. a. After final ā of a root, a y is often found as apparently a mere union-
consonant before another vowel: thus, in inflection, ádhāyi etc. (844), çāyáyati etc. (1042),
çivā́yās etc. (363 c), gā́yati etc. (761 e); further, in derivation, -gāya, -yāyam, dāyaka etc.; -
sthāyika; pāyána, -gāyana; dhā́yas, -hāyas; sthāyin etc. (many cases); -hitāyin, -tatāyin; sthāyuka.
b. Other more sporadic cases of inserted y — such as that in the pronoun-forms ayam,
iyam, vayam, yūyam, svayam; and in optative inflection before an ending beginning with a
vowel (565) — will be pointed out below in their connection.
Reduplication.
259. Reduplication of a root (originating doubtless in its complete repetition) has come to be
a method of radical increment or strengthening in various formative processes: namely,
a. in present-stem formation (642 ff.): as dádāmi, bibhármi;
b. in perfect-stem formation, almost universally (782 ff.): as tatā́na, dadhāú, cakā́ra, riréca,
lulópa;
c. in aorist-stem formation (856 ff.): as ádīdharam, ácucyavam;
d. in intensive and desiderative-stem formation, throughout (1000 ff., 1026 ff.): as ján̄ghanti,
jóhavīti, marmṛjyáte; pípāsati, jíghāṅsati;
e. in the formation of derivative noun-stems (1143 e): as pápri, cárcara, sāsahí, cikitú,
malimlucá.
f. Rules for the treatment of reduplication in these several cases will be given in the proper
connection below.
260. As, by reason of the strengthening and weakening changes indicated above, the same
root or stem not seldom exhibits, in the processes of inflection and derivation, varieties of
stronger and weaker form, the distinction and description of these varieties forms an important
part of the subjects hereafter to be treated.

CHAPTER IV.
DECLENSION.
261. The general subject of declension includes nouns, adjectives, and pronouns, all of
which are inflected in essentially the same manner. But while the correspondence of nouns and
adjectives is so close that they cannot well be separated in treatment (chap. V.), the pronouns,
which exhibit many peculiarities, will be best dealt with in a separate chapter (VII.); and the
words designating number, or numerals, also form a class peculiar enough to require to be
presented by themselves (chap. VI.).
262. Declensional forms show primarily case and number; but they also indicate gender —
since, though the distinctions of gender are made partly in the stem itself, they also appear, to
no inconsiderable extent, in the changes of inflection.
263. Gender. The genders are three, namely masculine, feminine, and neuter, as in the
other older Indo-European languages; and they follow in general the same laws of distribution
as, for example, in Greek and Latin.
a. The only words which show no sign of gender-distinction are the personal pronouns of
the first and second person (491), and the numerals above four (483).
264. Number. The numbers are three — singular, dual, and plural.
a. A few words are used only in the plural: as dārās wife, ā́pas water; the numeral dva two,
is dual only; and, as in other languages, many words are, by the nature of their use, found to
occur only in the singular.
265. As to the uses of the numerals, it needs only to be remarked that the dual is (with
only very rare and sporadic exceptions) used strictly in all cases where two objects are logically
indicated, whether directly or by combination of two individuals: thus, çivé te dyā́vāpṛthivī́ ubhé
stām may heaven and earth both be propitious to thee!  dāivaṁ ca mānuṣaṁ ca hotārāu vṛtvā
having chosen both the divine and the human sacrificers ; pathor devayānasya pitṛyāṇasya ca of
the two paths leading respectively to the gods and to the Fathers.

a. The dual is used alone (without dva two) properly when the duality of the objects
indicated is well understood; thus, açvínāu the two Açvins; índrasya hárī Indra's two bays; but
tasya dvāv açvāu staḥ he has two horses. But now and then the dual stands alone pregnantly:
thus, vedaṁ vedāu vedān vā one Veda or two or more than two ; ekaṣaṣṭe çate two hundred
and sixty-one.
266. Case. The cases are (including the vocative) eight: nominative, accusative,
instrumental, dative, ablative, genitive, locative, and vocative.
a. The order in which they are here mentioned is that established for them by the Hindu
grammarians, and accepted from these by Western scholars. The Hindu names of the cases are
founded on this order: the nominative is called prathamā first, the accusative dvitīyā second,
the 
genitive ṣaṣṭhī sixth 
(sc. vibhakti division, 
i.e. case), etc. The object sought in the
arrangement is simply to set next to one another those cases which are to a greater or less
extent, in one or another number, identical in form; and, putting the nominative first, as leading
case, there is no other order by which that object could be attained. The vocative is not
considered and named by the native grammarians as a case like the rest; in this work, it will
be given in the singular (where alone it is ever distinguished from the nominative otherwise
than by accent) at the end of the series of cases.
A compendious statement of the uses of the cases is given in the following paragraphs:
267. Uses of the Nominative. The nominative is the case of the subject of the sentence, and
of any word qualifying the subject, whether attributively, in apposition, or as predicate.
268. One or two peculiar constructions call for notice:
a. A predicate nominative, instead of an objective predicate in the accusative, is used with
middle verb-forms that signify regarding or calling one’s self: thus, sómam manyate papivā́n
(RV.) he thinks he has been drinking soma ; sá manyeta purāṇavít (AV.) he may regard himself
as wise in ancient things; durgā́d vā́ āhartā́ ’vocathāḥ (MS.) thou hast claimed to be a savior
out of trouble; índro brāhmaṇó brúvāṇaḥ (TS.) Indra pretending to be a Brahman ; katthase
satyavādī (R.) thou boasted thyself truthful. Similarly with the phrase rūpaṁ kṛ: thus, kṛṣṇó
rūpáṁ kṛtvā́ (TS.) taking on a black form  (i.e. making shape for himself as one that is black ).
b. A word made by iti (1102) logically predicate to an object is ordinarily nominative: thus,
svargó loká íti yáṁ vádanti (AV.) what they call the heavenly world : tam agniṣṭoma ity ācakṣate
(AB.) it they style agniṣṭoma; vidarbharājatanayāṁ damayantī ’ti viddhi mām  (MBh.) know me
for the Vidarbha-king’s daughter, Damayantī by

name. Both constructions are combined in ajñaṁ hi bālam ity āhuḥ pite ’ty eva tu mantradam
(M.) for to an ignorant man they give the name of ‘child’, but that of ‘father’ to one who
imparts the sacred texts.
c. A nominative, instead of a second vocative, is sometimes added to a vocative by ca and:
thus, índraç ca sómam pibatam bṛhaspate (RV.) together with Indra, do ye two drink the soma,
O Bṛhaspati! víçve devā yájamānaç ca sīdatā  (TS.) O ye All-Gods, and the sacrificer, take seats!
269. Uses of the Accusative. The accusative is especially the case of the direct object of a
transitive verb, and of any word qualifying that object, as attribute or appositive or objective
predicate. The construction of the verb is shared, of course, by its participles and infinitives;
but also, in Sanskrit, by a number of other derivatives, having a more or less participial or
infinitival character, and even sometimes by nouns and adjectives. A few prepositions are
accompanied by the accusative. As less direct object, or goal of motion or action, the accusative
is construed especially with verbs of approach and address. It is found used more adverbially as
adjunct of place or time or manner; and a host of adverbs are accusative cases in form. Two
accusatives are often found as objects of the same verb.
270. The use of the accusative as direct object of a transitive verb and of its infinitives and
participles hardly needs illustration; an example or two are: agním īḍe I praise Agni; námo
bhárantaḥ bringing homage; bhū́yo dā́tum arhasi thou shouldst give more. Of predicate words
qualifying the object, an example is tám ugráṁ kṛṇomi táṁ bráhmāṇam  (RV.) him I make
formidable, him a priest.
271. Of verbal derivatives having so far a participial character that they share the
construction of the verb, the variety is considerable: thus —
a. Derivatives in u from desiderative stems (1038) have wholly the character of present
participles: 
thus, damayantīm abhīpsavaḥ 
(MBh.) desiring to win Damayantī; didṛkṣur
janakātmajām (R.) desiring to see Janaka’s daughter . Rarely, also, the verbal noun in ā from
such a root: thus, svargam abhikān̄kṣayā (R.) with desire of paradise .
b. So-called primary derivatives in in have the same character: thus, mā́ṁ kāmínī (AV.)
loving me; enam abhibhāṣiṇī (MBh.) addressing him. Even the obviously secondary garbhín has
in ÇB. the same construction: thus, sárvāṇi bhūtā́ni garbhy àbhavat he became pregnant with
all beings.
c. Derivations in aka, in the later language: as, bhavantam abhivādakaḥ (MBh.) intending to
salute you; mithilām avarodhakaḥ (R.) besieging Mithilā.
d. Nouns in tar, very frequently in the older language, and as periphrastic future forms (942
ff.) in the later: thus, hántā yó vṛtráṁ

sánito ’tá vā́jaṁ dā́tā maghā́ni 
(RV.) who slayeth the dragon, winneth booty, bestoweth
largesses; tāu hī ’daṁ sarvaṁ hartārāu (JB.) for they seize on this universe ; tyaktāraḥ saṁyuge
prāṇān (MBh.) risking life in battle.
e. The root itself, in the older language, used with the value of a present participle at the
end of a compound: thus, yáṁ yajñám paribhū́r ási  (RV.) what offering thou surroundest
(protectest); áhim apáḥ pariṣṭhā́m (RV.) the dragon confining the waters . Also a superlative of a
root-stem (468, 471): thus, tváṁ vásu devayaté vániṣṭhaḥ (RV.) thou art chief winner of wealth
for the pious; tā́ sómaṁ somapā́tamā (RV.) they two are the greatest drinkers of soma .
f. The derivative in i from the (especially the reduplicated) root, in the older language: thus,
babhrír vájram papíḥ sómaṁ dadír gā́ḥ (RV.) bearing the thunderbolt, drinking the soma,
bestowing kine; yajñáṁ ātániḥ (RV.) extending the sacrifice.
g. Derivatives in uka, very frequently in the Brāhmaṇa language: thus, vatsā́ṅç ca ghā́tuko
vṛ́kaḥ (AV.) and the wolf destroys his calves ; véduko vā́so bhavati (TS.) he wins a garment;
kā́mukā enaṁ stríyo bhavanti (MS.) the women fall in love with him .
h. Other cases are more sporadic: thus, derivatives in a, as índro dṛḍhā́ cid ārujáḥ (RV.)
Indra breaks up even what is fast ; nāi ’vā ’rhaḥ pāitṛkaṁ riktham  (M.) by no means entitled to
his father’s estate; — in atnu, as vīḍú cid ārujatnúbhiḥ (RV.) with the breakers of whatever is
strong; — in atha, as yajáthāya devā́n (RV.) to make offering to the gods; — in ana, as taṁ
nivāraṇe (MBh.) in restraining him; svamāṅsam iva bhojane (R.) as if in eating one’s own flesh ;
— in ani, as samátsu turváṇiḥ pṛtanyū́n (RV.) overcoming foes in combats ; — in ti, as ná táṁ
dhūrtíḥ (RV.) there is no injuring him; — in van, as ápaçcāddaghvā́ ’nnam bhavati (MS.) he
does not come short of food; — in snu, as sthirā́ cin namayiṣṇavaḥ (RV.) bowing even firm
things.
272. Examples of an accusative with an ordinary noun or adjective are only occasional: such
words as ánuvrata faithful to, prátirūpa corresponding to, abhidhṛṣṇu daring to cope with,
pratyáñc opposite to, may be regarded as taking an accusative in virtue of the preposition they
contain; also ánuka, as ánukā devā́ váruṇam (MS.) the gods are inferior to Varuna . RV. has táṁ
antárvatīḥ pregnant with him; and AV. has mā́ṁ kā́mena through loving me.
273. The direct construction of cases with prepositions is comparatively restricted in
Sanskrit (1123 ff.). With the accusative are oftenest found prati, opposite to, in reference to,
etc.; also anu after, in the course of ; antar or antarā between; rarely ati across; abhi against,
to; and others (1129). Case-forms which have assumed a prepositional value are also often used
with the accusative: as antareṇa, uttareṇa, dakṣiṇena, avareṇa, ūrdhvam, ṛte .

274. The accusative is very often found also as object of verbs which in the related languages
are not transitive.
a. It stands especially as the goal of motion, with verbs of going, bringing, sending, and the
like: thus, vidarbhān agaman (MBh.) they went to Vidarbha; divaṁ yayuḥ (MBh.) they went to
heaven; vanagulmān dhāvantaḥ (MBh.) running to woods and bushes; apó dívam úd vahanti
(AV.) they carry up waters to the sky ; devā́n yaje (AV.) I make offering to the gods.
b. With verbs meaning go, this is an extremely common construction; and the use of such a
verb with an abstract noun makes peculiar phrases of becoming: thus, samatām eti he goes to
equality (i.e. becomes equal); sa gacched badhyatām mama (MBh.) he shall become liable to be
slain by me; sa pañcatvam āgataḥ (H.) he was resolved into the five elements  (underwent
dissolution, died).
c. Verbs of speaking follow the same rule: thus, tam abravīt he said to him; prākroçad
uccāir nāiṣadham (MBh.) she cried out loudly to the Nishadhan ; yás tvo ’vā́ca (AV.) who spoke
to thee.
d. The assumption of an accusative object is exceptionally easy in Sanskrit, and such an
object is often taken by a verb or phrase in which is strictly of intransitive character: thus,
sáhasā prā́ ’sy anyā́n  (RV.) in might thou excellest (lit. art ahead) others, devā́ vāí bráhma sám
avadanta (MS.) the gods were discussing  (lit. were talking together) brahman; antár vāí mā
yajn̄ā́d yanti (MS.) surely they are cutting me off (lit. are going between) from the offering; tā́ṁ
sám babhūva (ÇB.) he had intercourse with her.
275. Examples of the cognate accusative, or accusative of implied object, are not infrequent:
thus, tápas tapyāmahe (AV.) we do penance; té hāi ’tā́m edhatúm edhā́ṁ cakrire  (ÇB.) they
prospered with that prosperity; uṣitvā sukhavāsam (R.) abiding happily.
276. The accusative is often used in more adverbial constructions. Thus:
a. Occasionally, to denote measure of space: thus, yojanaçataṁ gantum (MBh.) to go a
hundred leagues; ṣaḍ ucchrito yojanāni (MBh.) six leagues high.
b. Much more often, to denote measure or duration of time: thus, sá saṁvatsarám ūrdhvò
‘tiṣṭhat (AV.) he stood a year upright ; tisró rā́trīr dīkṣitáḥ syāt  (TS.) let him be consecrated
three nights; gatvā trīn ahorātrān (MBh.) having traveled three complete days .
c. Sometimes, to denote the point of space, or, oftener, of time: thus, yā́m asya díçaṁ
dásyuḥ syā́t (ÇB.) whatever region his enemy may be in ; ténāi ’tā́ṁ rā́triṁ sahā́” jagāma (ÇB.)
he arrived that night with him ; imāṁ rajanīṁ vyuṣṭām (MBh.) this current night.
d. Very often, to denote manner or accompanying circumstance. Thus, the neuter accusative
of innumerable adjectives, simple or compound

(1111), is used adverbially, while certain kinds of compounds are thus used to such an extent
that the Hindu grammarians have made of them a special adverbial class (1313).
e. Special cases are occasionally met with: thus, brahmacáryam uvāsa (ÇB.) he kept a term
of studentship; phalám pacyánte (MS.) they ripen their fruit; gā́ṁ dīvyadhvam (MS., S.) gamble
for a cow.
277. The accusative is, of course, freely used with other cases to limit the same verb, as the
sense requires. And whenever it is usable with a verb in two different constructions, the verb
may take two accusatives, one in each construction: and such combinations are quite frequent
in Sanskrit. Thus, with verbs of appealing, asking, having recourse: as, apó yācāmi bheṣajám
(RV.) I ask the waters for medicine ; tvām ahaṁ satyam icchāmi (R.) I desire truth from thee ;
tvāṁ vayaṁ çaraṇaṁ gatāḥ (MBh.) we have resorted to thee for succor ;—with verbs of bringing,
sending, following, imparting, saying: as, gurutvaṁ naraṁ nayanti (H.) they bring a man to
respectability; sītā cā ’nvetu māṁ vanam  (R.) and let Sītā accompany me to the forest ;
supéçasaṁ mā́ ’va sṛjanty ástam  (RV.) they let me go home well adorned ; tām idam abravīt
(MBh.) this he said to her ;—and in other less common cases: as, vṛkṣáṁ pakváṁ phálaṁ
dhūnuhi (RV.) shake ripe fruit from the tree; tā́ṁ viṣám evā́ ’dhok (AV.) poison he milked from
her; jitvā rājyaṁ nalam (MBh.) having won the kingdom from Nala ; ámuṣṇītaṁ paṇíṁ gā́ḥ (RV.)
ye robbed the Paṇi of the kine ; draṣṭum icchāvaḥ putram paçcimadarçanam (R.) we wish to see
our son for the last time.
a. A causative form of a transitive verb regularly admits two accusative objects: thus, devā́ṅ
uçatáḥ pāyayā havíḥ (RV.) make the eager gods drink the oblation ; óṣadhīr evá phálaṁ
grāhayati (MS.) he makes the plants bear fruit; vaṇijo dāpayet karān (M.) he should cause the
merchants to pay taxes. But such a causative sometimes takes an instrumental instead of a
second accusative: see 282 b.
278. Uses of the Instrumental. The instrumental is originally the with-case: it denotes
adjacency, accompaniment, association—passing over into the expression of means and
instrument by the same transfer of meaning which appears in the English prepositions with and
by.
a. Nearly all the uses of the case are readily deducible from this fundamental meaning, and
show nothing anomalous or difficult.
279. The instrumental is often used to signify accompaniment: thus, agnír devébhir ā́ gamet
(RV.) may Agni come hither along with the gods ; marúdbhī rudráṁ huvema (RV.) we would call
Rudra with the Marurts; dvāpareṇa sahāyena kva yāsyasi  (MBh.) whither wilt thou go, with
Dvāpara for companion? kathayan nāiṣadhena (MBh.) talking with the Nishadhan . But the
relation of simple accompaniment is more often helped to plainer expression by prepositions
(saha etc.: 284).

280. The instrumental of means or instrument or agent is yet more frequent: thus, bhadráṁ
kárṇebhiḥ çṛṇuyāma (RV.) may we hear with our ears what is propitious ; çastreṇa nidhanam
(MBh.) death by the sword; kecit padbhyāṁ hatā gajāiḥ (MBh.) some were slain by the
elephants 
with 
their 
feet; 
pṛthak 
pāṇibhyāṁ 
darbhataruṇakāir 
navanītenā
’n̄guṣṭhopakaniṣṭhikābhyām akṣiṇī ājya (AGS.) anointing their eyes with fresh butter, by help of
the bunches of darbha-grass, with the thumb and ring-finger, using the two hands successively .
And this passes easily over into the expression of occasion or reason (for which the ablative is
more frequent): thus, kṛpayā through pity; tena satyena in virtue of that truth .
281. Of special applications, the following may be noticed:
a. Accordance, equality, likeness, and the like: thus, samáṁ jyótiḥ sū́ryeṇa (AV.) a brightness
equal with the sun; yeṣām ahaṁ na pādarajasā tulyaḥ (MBh.) to the dust of whose feet I am
not equal.
b. Price (by which obtained): thus, daçábhiḥ krīṇāti dhenúbhiḥ (RV.) he buys with ten kine ;
gavāṁ çatasahasreṇa dīyatāṁ çabalā mama  (R.) let Çabalā be given me for a hundred thousand
cows; sa te ’kṣahṛdayaṁ dātā rājā, ’çvahṛdayena vāi  (MBh.) the king will give thee the secret
science of dice in return for that of horses.
c. Medium, and hence also space or distance or road, traversed: thus, udnā́ ná nā́vam
anayanta (RV.) they brought [him] as it were a ship by water ; é ’há yātam pathíbhir devayā́nāiḥ
(RV.) come hither by god-traveled paths ; jagmur vihāyasā (MBh.) they went off through the air .
d. Time passed through, or by the lapse of which anything is brought about: thus, vidarbhān
yātum icchāmy ekāhnā (MBh.) I wish to go to Vidarbha in the course of one day ; te ca kālena
mahatā yāuvanam pratipedire (R.) and they in a long time attained adolescence ; tatra kālena
jāyante mānavā dīrghajīvinaḥ (M.) 'there in time are born men long-lived . This use of the
instrumental borders upon that of the locative and ablative.
e. The part of the body on (or by) which anything is borne is usually expressed by the
instrumental: as, kukkuraḥ skandheno ’hyate (H.) a dog is carried on the shoulder ; and this
construction is extended to such cases as tulayā kṛtam (H.) put on (i.e. so as to be carried by )
a balance.
f. Not infrequently used are such phrases as bahunā kim pralāpena (R.) 'what is the use of
(i.e. is gained by) much talking? ko nu me jīvitenā ’rthaḥ (MBh.) what object is life to me?
nīrujas tu kim āuṣadhāiḥ (H.) but what has a well man to do with medicines?
g. An instrumental of accompaniment is occasionally used almost or quite with the value of
an instrumental absolute: thus, na tvayā ’tra mayā ’vasthitena kā ’pi cintā kāryā  (Pañc.) with
me at hand, thou need’st feel no anxiety whatever on this point.

282. a. The construction of a passive verb (or participle) with an instrumental of the agent
is common from the earliest period, and becomes decidedly more so later, the passive participle
with instrumental taking to no small extent the place of an active verb with its subject. Thus,
yaména dattáḥ (RV.) given by Yama; ṛ́ṣibhir ī́ḍyaḥ (RV.) to be praised by sages; vyādhena jālaṁ
vistīrṇam (H.) by the hunter a net [was] spread ; tac chrutvā jaradgaveno ’ktam (H.) Jaradgava,
hearing this, said; mayā gantavyam (H.) I shall go. A predicate to the instrumental subject of
such a construction is, of course, also in the instrumental: thus, adhunā tavā ’nucareṇa mayā
sarvathā bhavitavyam (H.) henceforth I shall always by thy companion ; avahitāir bhavitavyam
bhavadbhiḥ (Vikr.) you must be attentive.
b. A causative verb sometimes takes an instrumental instead of an accusative as second
object: thus, tāṁ çvabhiḥ khādayed rājā (M.) the king should have her devoured by dogs ; tā́
váruṇenā ’grāhayat (MS.) he caused Varuṇa to seize them.
283. Many instrumental constructions are such as call in translation for other prepositions
than with or by; yet the true instrumental relation is usually to be traced, especially if the
etymological sense of the words be carefully considered.
a. More anomalously, however, the instrumental is used interchangeably with the ablative
with words signifying separation: thus, vatsāír víyutāḥ (RV.) separated from their calves; mā́
’hám ātmánā ví rādhiṣi (AV.) let me not be severed from the breath of life ; sa tayā vyayujyata
(MBh.) he was parted from her ; pāpmánāi ’vāí ’naṁ ví punanti  (MS.) they cleanse him from evil
(compare English parted with). The same meaning may be given to the case even when
accompanied by saha with: thus, bhartrā saha viyogaḥ (MBh.) separation from her husband.
284. The prepositions taking the instrumental (1127) are those signifying with and the like:
thus, saha, with the adverbial words containing sa as an element, as sākam, sārdham,
saratham;—and, in general, a word compounded with sa, sam, saha takes an instrumental as its
regular and natural complement. But also the preposition vinā without takes sometimes the
instrumental (cf. 283 a).
285. Uses of the Dative. The dative is the case of the indirect object—or that toward or in
the direction of or in order to or for which anything is or is done (either intransitively or to a
direct object).
a. In more physical connections, the uses of the dative approach those of the accusative (the
more proper to-case), and the two are sometimes interchangeable; but the general value of the
dative as the toward- or for-case is almost everywhere distinctly to be traced.
286. Thus, the dative is used with—
a. Words signifying give, share out, assign, and the like: thus, yó ná dádāti sákhye  (RV.)
who gives not to a friend ; yácchā ’smāi çárma (RV.) bestow upon him protection.

b. Words signifying show, announce, declare, and the like: thus, dhanur darçaya rāmāya (R.)
show the bow to Rāma ; āvír ebhyo abhavat sū́ryaḥ (RV.) the sun was manifested to them ;
ṛtuparṇam bhīmāya pratyavedayan 
(MBh.) they announced Rituparṇa to Bhīma; tebhyaḥ
pratijñāya (MBh.) having promised to them.
c. Words signifying give attention, have a regard  or feeling, aspire, and the like: thus,
niveçāya mano dadhuḥ (MBh.) they set their minds upon encamping ; māté ’va putrébhyo mṛḍa
(AV.) be gracious as a mother to her sons ; kím asmábhyaṁ hṛṇīṣe (RV.) why art thou angry at
us? kāmāya spṛhayaty ātmā (Spr.) the soul longs for love .
d. Words signifying please, suit, conduce, and the like: thus, yadyad rocate viprebhyaḥ (M.)
whatever is pleasing to Brahmans; tad ānantyāya kalpate (KU.) that makes for immortality
e. Words signifying inclination, 'obeisance, and the like: thus, máhyaṁ namantām pradíçaç
cátasraḥ (RV.) let the four quarters bow themselves to me ; devebhyo namaskṛtya (MBh.) having
paid homage to the gods;;.
f. Words signifying hurling or casting: as yéna dūḍā́çe ásyasi (AV.) with which thou hurlest
at the impious.
g. In some of these constructions the genitive and locative are also used: see below.
287. In its more distinctive sense, as signifying for, for the benefit of, with reference to ,
and the like, the dative is used freely, and in a great variety of constructions. And this use
passes over into that of the dative of end or purpose, which is extremely common. Thus, íṣuṁ
kṛṇvānā́ ásanāya (AV.) making an arrow for hurling; gṛhṇā́mi te sāubhagatvā́ya hástam (RV.) I
take thy hand in order to happiness; rāṣṭrā́ya máhyam badhyatāṁ sapátnebhyaḥ parābhúve  (AV.)
be it bound on in order to royalty for me, in order to destruction for my enemies .
a. Such a dative is much used predicatively (and oftenest with the copula omitted), in the
sense of makes for, tends toward ; also is intended for, and so must; or is liable to, and so can.
Thus, upadeço mūrkhāṇām prakopāya na çāntaye  (H.) good counsel [tends] to the exasperation,
not the conciliation, of fools; sa ca tasyāḥ saṁtoṣāya nā ’bhavat  (H.) and he was not to her
satisfaction; sugopā́ asi ná dábhāya (RV.) thou art a good herdsman, not one for cheating  (i.e.
not to be cheated).
b. These uses of the dative are in the older language especially illustrated by the dative
infinitives, for which see 982.
288. The dative is not to be used with prepositions (1124).
289. Uses of the Ablative. The ablative is the from-case, in the various senses of that
preposition; it is used to express removal, separation, distinction, issue, and the like.
290. The ablative is used where expulsion, removal, distinction, release, defense, and other
kindred relations are expressed: thus, té sedhanti pathó vṛ́kam (AV.) they drive away the wolf
from the path; mā́ prá

gāma patháḥ (RV.) may we not go away from the path ; éti vā́ eṣá yajñamukhā́t (MS.) he verily
goes away from the face of the sacrifice; āré asmád astu hetíḥ (AV.) far from us be your
missile; pātáṁ no vṛ́kāt (RV.) save us from the wolf ; ástabhnād dyā́m avasrásaḥ (RV.) he kept
(lit. made firm) the sky from falling.
291. The ablative is used where procedure or issue from something as from a source or
starting-point is signified: thus, çukrā́ kṛṣṇā́d ajaniṣṭa (RV.) the bright one has been born from
the black one; lobhāt krodhaḥ prabhavati (MBh.) passion arises from greed; vā́tāt te prāṇám
avidam (AV.) I have won thy life-breath from the wind ; yé prā́cyā diçó abhidā́santy asmā́n (AV.)
who attack us from the eastern quarter ; tac chrutvā sakhigaṇāt  (MBh.) having heard that from
the troop of friends; vāyur antarikṣād abhāṣata (MBh.) the wind spoke from the sky .
a. Hence also, procedure as from a cause or occasion is signified by the ablative: this is
especially frequent in the later language, and in technical phraseology is a standing
construction; it borders on instrumental constructions. Thus, vájrasya çúṣṇād dadāra (RV.) from
(by reason of) the fury of the thunderbolt he burst asunder ; yasya daṇḍabhayāt sarve dharmam
anurudhyanti (MBh.) from fear of whose rod all are constant to duty ; akāramiçritatvād ekārasya
(Tribh.) because e contains an element of a.
b. Very rarely, an ablative has the sense of after: thus, agacchann ahorātrāt tīrtham (MBh.)
they went to the shrine after a whole day ; ṭakārāt sakāre takāreṇa (APr.) after ṭ, before s, is
inserted t
292. One or two special applications of the ablative construction are to be noticed:
a. The ablative with words implying fear (terrified recoil from): thus, tásyā jātā́yāḥ sárvam
abibhet (AV.) everything was afraid of her at her birth ; yásmād réjanta kṛṣṭáyaḥ (RV.) at whom
mortals tremble; yuṣmád bhiyā́ (RV.) through fear of you; yasmān no ’dvijate lokaḥ (BhG.) of
whom the world is not afraid.
b. The ablative of comparison (distinction from): thus, prá ririce divá índraḥ pṛthivyā́ḥ (RV.)
Indra is greater than the heaven and the earth . With a comparative, or other word used in a
kindred way, the ablative is the regular and almost constant construction: thus, svādóḥ svā́dīyaḥ
(RV.) sweeter than the sweet; kiṁ tasmād duḥkhataram (MBh.) what is more painful than that?
ko mitrād anyaḥ (H.) who else than a friend; gā avṛṇīthā mat (AB.) thou hast chosen the kine
rather than me; ajñebhyo granthinaḥ çreṣṭhā granthibhyo dhāriṇo varāḥ (M.) possessors of texts
are better than ignorant men; rememberers are better than possessors; tád anyátra tván ní
dadhmasi (AV.) we set this down elsewhere (away) from thee; pū́rvā víçvasmād bhúvanāt  (RV.)
earlier than all beings.
c. Occasionally, a probably possessive genitive is used with the comparative; or an
instrumental (as in comparison of equality): thus,

nā ’sti dhanyataro mama  (R.) there is no one more fortunate than I  (i.e. my superior in
fortune); putram mama prāṇāir garīyasam (MBh.) a son dearer than my life.
d. Occasionally, an ablative is used instead of a partitive genitive: thus, mithunād ekaṁ
jaghāna (R.) he slew one out of the pair ; tebhya ekam (KSS.) one of them.
293. The ablative is used with a variety of prepositions and words sharing a prepositional
character (1128); but all these have rather an adverbial value, as strengthening or defining the
from-relation, than any proper governing force. We may notice here:
a. In the Veda, ádhi and pári are much used as directing and strengthening adjuncts with
the ablative: as, jātó himávatas pári (AV.) born from the Himalaya (forth); samudrā́d ádhi jajñiṣe
(AV.) thou art born from the ocean ; cárantam pári tasthúṣaḥ (RV.) moving forth from that which
stands fast.
b. Also purā́ (and purás), in the sense of forward from, and hence before: as, purā́ járasaḥ
(RV.) before old age: and hence also, with words of protection and the like, from: as
çaçamānáḥ purā́ nidáḥ (RV.) securing from ill-will.
c. Also ā́, in the sense of hither from, all the way from : as, ā́ mū́lād ánu çuṣyatu (AV.) let it
dry completely up from the root; tásmād ā́ nadyò nā́ma stha  (AV.) since that time ye are called
rivers. But usually, and especially in the later language, the measurement of interval implied in
ā́ is reversed in direction, and the construction means all the way to, until : as, yatī́ giríbhya ā́
samudrā́t (RV.) going from the mountains to the ocean ; ā́ ’syá yajñásyo ’dṛ́caḥ (VS.) until the
end of this sacrifice; ā ṣoḍaçāt (M.) till the sixteenth year; ā pradānāt (Ç.) until her marriage.
294. Uses of the Genitive. a. The proper value of the genitive is adjectival; it belongs to and
qualifies a noun, designating something relating to the latter in a manner which the nature of
the case, or the connection, defines more nearly. Other genitive constructions, with adjective or
verb or preposition, appear to arise out of this, by a more or less distinctly traceable
connection.
b. The use of the genitive has become much extended, especially in the later language, by
attribution of a noun-character to the adjective, and by pregnant verbal construction, so that it
often bears the aspect of being a substitute for other cases—as dative, instrumental, ablative,
locative.
295. The genitive in its normal adjective construction with a noun or pronoun is classifiable
into the usual varieties: as, genitive of possession or appurtenance, including the complement of
implied relation—this is, as elsewhere, the commonest of all; the so-called partitive genitive; the
subjective and objective genitives; and so on. Genitives of apposition or

equivalence (city of Rome ), and of characteristic (man of honor), do not occur, and hardly that
of material (house of wood). Examples are: índrasya vájraḥ Indra's thunderbolt; pitā putrāṇām
father of sons; putraḥ pituḥ son of the father; pituḥ kāmaḥ putrasya the father's love of the son ;
ke naḥ which of us; çataṁ dāsīnām a hundred female slaves.
a. The expression of possession etc. on the part of pronouns is made almost entirely by the
genitive case, and not by a derived possessive adjective (516).
b. Exceptional cases like nagarasya mārgaḥ the road to the city  (cf. le chemin de Paris),
yasyā ’haṁ dūta īpsitaḥ (MBh.) as messenger to whom I am wanted , are occasionally met with.
296. The genitive is dependent on an adjective:
a. A so-called partitive genitive with a superlative, or another word of similar substantival
value: thus, çreṣṭhaṁ vīrāṇām best of heroes ; vīrúdhāṁ vīryàvatī (AV.) of plants the mighty
(mightiest) one.
b. Very often, by a transfer of the possessive genitive from noun to adjective, the adjective
being treated as if it had noun-value: thus, tasya samaḥ or anurūpaḥ or sadṛçaḥ resembling
him (i.e. his like); tasya priyā dear to him (his dear one); tasyā ’viditam unknown to him (his
unknown thing) ; hávyaç carṣaṇīnā́m (RV.) to be sacrificed to by mortals (their object of
sacrifice); īpsito naranārīṇām (MBh.) desired of men and women (their object of desire); yasya
kasya prasūtaḥ (H.) of whomsoever born (his son); hantavyo ‘smi na te (MBh.) I am not to be
slain of thee; kim arthināṁ vañcayitavyam asti (H.) why should there be a deceiving of
supplicants?
c. In part, by a construction similar to that of verbs which take a genitive object: thus,
abhijñā rājadharmāṇām (R.) understanding the duties of a king.
297. The genitive as object of a verb is:
a. A possessive genitive of the recipient, by pregnant construction, with verbs signifying
give, impart, communicate, and the like: thus, varān pradāyā ’sya (MBh.) having bestowed gifts
upon him (made them his by bestowal); rājño niveditam (H.) it was made known to the king
(made his by knowledge) ; yad anyasya pratijñāya punar anyasya dīyate  (M.) that after being
promised to one she is given to another. This construction, by which the genitive becomes
substitute for a dative or locative, abounds in the later language, and is extended sometimes to
problematic and difficult cases.
b. A (in most cases, probably) partitive genitive, as a less complete or less absolute object
than an accusative: thus, with verbs meaning partake (eat, drink, etc.), as píba sutásya (AV.)
drink (of) the soma; mádhvaḥ pāyaya (RV.) cause to drink the sweet drought ;—with verbs
meaning impart (of the thing impearted) etc., as dadāta no amṛ́tasya (RV.) bestow upon us
immortality;—with verbs meaning enjoy, be satisfied or filled

with: as, mátsy ándhasaḥ (RV.) do thou enjoy the juice ; ājyasya pūrayanti (S.) they fill with
butter;—with verbs meaning perceive, note, care for, regard  with feeling of various kinds: as,
vásiṣṭhasya stuvatá índro açrot (RV.) Indra listened to Vasishtha who was praising him ; yáthā
máma smárāt (AV.) that he may think of me; tasya cukopa (MBh.) he was angry at him.
c. A genitive of more doubtful character, with verbs meaning rule or have authority: as,
tvám īçiṣe vásūnām (RV.) thou art lord of good things ; yáthā ’hám eṣā́ṁ virā́jāni (AV.) that I
may rule over them; katham mṛtyuḥ prabhavati vedaçāstravidām  (M.) how has death power over
those who know the Vedas and treatises?
d. A genitive, instead of an ablative, is sometimes found used with a verb of receiving of
any kind (hearing included), and with one of fearing: thus, yo rājñaḥ pratigṛhṇāti lubdhasya
(M.) whoever accepts a gift from a greedy king ; çṛṇu me (MBh.) learn from me; bibhīmas tava
(MBh.) we are afraid of thee .
298. A genitive in its usual possessive sense is often found as predicate, and not seldom
with the copula omitted: thus, yáthā́ ’so máma kévalaḥ (AV.) that thou mayest be wholly mine;
sarvāḥ sampattayas tasya saṁtuṣṭaṁ yasya mānasam<tt? (H.) all good fortunes are his who has
a contented mind;—as objective predicate, bhartuḥ putraṁ vijānanti (M.) they recognize a son
as the husband's.
299. a. The prepositional constructions of the genitive (1130) are for the most part with
such prepositions as are really noun-cases and have the government of such: thus, agre, arthe,
kṛte, and the like; also with other prepositional words which, in the general looseness of use of
the genitive, have become assimilated to these. A few more real prepositions take the genitive:
either usually, like upári above, or occasionally, like adhás, antár, áti.
b. A genitive is occasionally used in the older language with an adverb, either of place or of
time: thus, yátra kvà ca kurukṣetrásya (ÇB.) in whatever part of Kurukshetra ; yátra tú bhū́mer
jā́yeta (MS.) on what spot of earth he may be born ; idā́nīm áhnaḥ (RV.) at this time of the day ;
yásyā rā́tryāḥ prātáḥ (MS.) on the morn of what night ; dviḥ saṁvatsarasya (K.) twice a year.
Such expression as the last occur also later.
300. a. The genitive is very little used adverbially; a few genitives of time occur in the
older language: as, aktos by night, vastos by day; and there are found later such cases as
kasya cit kālasya (Ç.) after a certain time; tataḥ kālasya mahataḥ prayayāu (R.) then after a
long time he went forth.
b. A genitive, originally of possession, passing over into one of general concernment, comes
in the later language (the construction is unknown earlier) to be used absolutely, with an
agreeing participle, or quite rarely

an adjective. From such cases as the following—paçyato bakamūrkhasya nakulāir bhakṣitāḥ
sutāḥ (H.) of the foolish heron, while he looked on, the young were eaten by the ichneumons ,
or gato ‘rdharātraḥ kathāḥ kathayato mama  (KSS.) half my night was passed in telling stories ,
or kartavyasya karmaṇaḥ kṣipram akriyamāṇasya kālaḥ pibati tadrasam (H.) of a work needing
to be done but left undone time quickly drinks up its essence—come into currency, by
increasing independence of the genitive, such other cases as: divaṁ jagāma munīnām paçyatāṁ
tadā (R.) he went then to heaven, the ascetics looking on ; evaṁ lālapatas tasya devadūtas tadā
’bhyetya vākyam āha (MBh.) as he thus lamented, a divine messenger coming addressed him ; iti
vādina evā ’sya dhenur āvavṛte vanāt (Ragh.) while he thus spoke, the cow came from the
forest. The genitive always indicates a living actor, and the participle is usually one of seeing or
hearing or uttering, especially the former. The construction is said by the Hindu grammarians
to convey an implication of disregard or despite; and such is often to be recognized in it,
though not prevailingly.
301. Uses of the Locative. a. The locative is properly the in-case, the case expressing
situation or location; but its sphere of use has been somewhat extended, so as to touch and
overlap the boundaries of other cases, for which it seems to be a substitute.
b. Unimportant variations of the sense of in are those of amid or among, on, and at. Of
course, also, situation in time as well as place is indicated by the case; and it is applied to yet
less physical relations, to sphere of action and feeling and knowledge, to state of things, to
accompanying circumstance; and out of this last grows the frequent use of the locative as the
case absolute.
c. Moreover, by a pregnant construction, the locative is used to denote the place of rest or
cessation of action or motion (into or on to instead of in or on; German in with accusative
instead of dative: compare English there for thither).
302. a. The locative of situation in space hardly needs illustration. An example or two are:
yé devā́ diví sthá  (AV.) which of you gods are in heaven ; na deveṣu na yakṣeṣu tādṛk (MBh.)
not among gods or Yakshas is such a one ; párvatasya pṛṣṭhé (RV.) on the ridge of the
mountain; vidáthe santu devā́ḥ (RV.) may the gods be at the assembly ; daçame pade (MBh.) at
the tenth step.
b. The locative of time indicates the point of time at which anything takes place: thus, asyā́
uṣáso vyùṣṭāu (RV.) at the shining forth of this dawn ; etasminn eva kāle (MBh.) at just that
time; dvādaçe varṣe (MBh.) in the twelfth year . That the accusative is occasionally used in this
sense, instead of the locative, was pointed out above (276 c).
c. The person with whom, instead of the place at which, one is or remains is put in the
locative: thus, tíṣṭhanty asmin paçávaḥ (MS.) animals abide with him; gurāu vasan (M.) living at
a teacher's; and, pregnantly, tāvat tvayi bhaviṣyāmi (MBh.) so long will I cleave to thee .

303. The locative of sphere or condition or circumstance is of very frequent use: thus, máde
áhim índro jaghāna (RV.) in fury Indra slew the dragon ; mitrásya sumatāú syāma (RV.) may we
be in the favor of Mitra; te vacane ratam (MBh.) delighted in thy words.
a. This construction is, on the one hand, generalized into an expression for in the matter or
case of; or with reference to, respecting, and takes in the later language a very wide range,
touching upon genitive and dative constructions: thus é ’mám bhaja grā́me áçveṣu góṣu  (AV.)
be generous to him in retainers, in horses, in cattle ; tám ít sakhitvá īmahe  (RV.) him we beg
for friendship; upāyo ‘yaṁ mayā dṛṣṭa ānayane tava  (MBh.) this means was devised by me for
(with reference to) bringing thee hither; satītve kāraṇaṁ striyāḥ (H.) the cause of (in the case
of) a woman's chastity; na çakto ‘bhavan nivāraṇe (MBh.) he was not capable of preventing.
b. On the other hand, the expression by the locative of a condition of things in which
anything takes place, or of a conditioning or accompanying circumstance, passes over into a
well-marked absolute construction, which is known even in the earliest stage of the language,
but becomes more frequent later. Transitional examples are: háve tvā sū́ra údite háve
madhyáṁdine diváḥ (RV.) I call to thee at the arisen sun  (when the sun has risen) , I call at
midtime of the day; aparādhe kṛte ‘pi ca na me kopaḥ (MBh.) and even in the case of an
offence committed, there is no anger on my part.
c. The normal condition of the absolute construction is with a participle accompanying the
noun: thus, stīrṇé barhíṣi samidhāné agnāú  (RV.) when the barhis is strewn and the fire
kindled; kāle çubhe prāpte (MBh.) a propitious time having arrived ; avasannāyāṁ rātrāv
astācalacūḍāvalambini candramasi (H.) the night having drawn to a close, and the moon resting
on the summit of the western mountain.
d. But the noun may be wanting, or may be replaced by an adverbial substitute (as evam,
tathā, iti): thus, varṣati when it rains; [sūrye] astamite after sunset; ādityasya dṛçyamāne (S.)
while there is seen [some part] of the sun; ity ardhokte (Ç.) with these words half uttered ;
asmābhiḥ samanujñāte (MBh.) it being thus spoken by Kali ; tathā ’nuṣṭhite (H.) it being thus
accomplished. So likewise the participle may be wanting (a copula sati or the like having to be
supplied): thus, dūre bhaye the cause of fear being remote ; while, on the other hand, the
participle sati etc. is sometimes redundantly added to the other participle: thus, tathā kṛte sati
it being thus done .
e. The locative is frequently used adverbially or prepositionally (1116): thus, - arthe or -kṛte
in the manner of, for the sake of ; agre in front of; ṛte without; samīpe near.
304. The pregnant construction by which the locative comes to express the goal or object of
motion or action or feeling exercised is not

uncommon from the earliest time. It is by no means to be sharply distinguished from the
ordinary construction; the two pass into one another, with a doubtful territory between. It
occurs:
a. Especially with verbs, as of arriving, sending, placing, communicating, bestowing, and
many others, in situations where an accusative or a dative (or a genitive, 297 a) might be
looked for, and exchangeable with them: thus, sá íd devéṣu gacchati (RV.) that, truly, goes to
(to be among) the gods; imáṁ no yajñám amṛ́teṣu dhehi  (RV.) set this offering of ours among
the immortals; yá āsiñcánti rásam óṣadhīṣu (AV.) who pour in the juice into the plants  (or, the
juice that is in the plants); mā prayacche ”çvare dhanam  (H.) do not offer wealth to a lord ;
papāta medinyām (MBh.) he fell to (so as to be upon ) the earth; skandhe kṛtvā (H.) putting on
the shoulder; saṁçrutya pūrvam asmāsu (MBh.) having before promised us.
b. Often also with nouns and adjectives in similar constructions (the instances not always
easy to separate from those of the locative meaning with reference to: above, 303 a): thus,
dayā sarvabhūteṣu compassion toward all creatures ; anurāgaṁ nāiṣadhe (MBh.) affection for the
Nishadhan; rājā samyag vṛttaḥ sadā tvayi (MBh.) the king has always behaved properly toward
thee.
305. The prepositions construed with the locative (1126) stand to it only in the relation of
adverbial elements strengthening and directing its meaning.
306. Declensional forms are made by the addition of endings to the stem, or base of
inflection.
a. The stem itself, however, in many words and classes of words, is liable to variation,
especially assuming a stronger form in some cases and a weaker in others.
b. And between stem and ending are sometimes inserted connecting elements (or what, in
the recorded condition of the language, have the aspect of being such).
c. Respecting all of these points, the details of treatment, as exhibited by each class of
words or by single words, will be given in the following chapters. Here, however, it is desirable
to present a brief general view of them.
307. Endings: Singular. a. In the nominative, the usual masc. and fem. ending is s—which,
however, is wanting in derivative ā and ī-stems; it is also euphonically lost (150) by consonant-
stems. Neuters in general have no ending, but show in this case the bare stem; a-stems alone
add m (as in the accus. masc.). Among the pronouns, am is a frequent masc. and fem. nom.
ending (and is found even in du. and pl.); and neuters show a form in d.

b. In the accusative, m or am is the masc. and fem. ending— am being added after a
consonant and ṛ, and after ī and ū in the radical division, and m elsewhere after vowels. The
neuter accusative is like the nominative.
c. The instrumental ending for all genders alike is ā. With final i- and u-vowels, the ā is
variously combined, and in the older language it is sometimes lost by contraction with them.
Stems in a make the case end in ena (sometimes enā in V.), and those in ā make it end in ayā;
but instances occur, in the early language, of immediate addition of ā to both a and ā.
d. The dative ending is in general e; and with it likewise the modes of combination of i and
u final are various (and disappearance by contraction not unknown in the oldest language). The
a-stems are quite irregular in this case, making it end in āya—excepted is the pronominal
element -sma, which combines (apparently) with e to -smāi. In the personal pronouns is found
bhyam (or hyam).
e. A fuller ending āi (like gen.-abl. ās and loc. ām: see below) belongs to feminine stems
only. It is taken (with interposed y) by the great class of those in derivative ā; also by those in
derivative ī, and (as reckoned in the later language) in derivative ū. And later it is allowed to
be taken by feminine stems in radical ī and ū, and even by those in i and u: these last have it
in the earliest language in only exceptional instances. For the substitution of āi for abl.-gen. ās,
see below, h.
f. The ablative has a special ending, d (or t), only in a-stems, masc. and neut., the a being
lengthened before it (except in the personal pronouns of 1st and 2d person, which have the
same ending at in the pl., and even, in in the old language, in the dual). Everywhere else, the
ablative is identical with the genitive.
g. The genitive of a-stems (and of one pronominal u-stem, amu) adds sya. Elsewhere, the
usual abl.-gen. ending is as; but its irregularities of treatment in combination with a stem-final
are considerable. With i and u, it is either directly added (only in the old language), added with
interposed n, or fused to es and os respectively. With ṛ (or ar) it yields ur (or us: 169 b).
h. The fuller ās is taken by feminine stems precisely as āi is taken in the dative: see above.
But in the language of the Brāhmaṇas and Sūtras, the dative-ending āi is regularly and
commonly used instead of ās, both of ablative and of genitive. See 365 d.
i. The locative ending is i in consonant- and ṛ and a-stems (fusing with a to e in the latter).
The i- and u-stems (unless the final vowel is saved by an interposed n) make the case end in
āu; but the Veda has some relics or traces of the older forms ( ay-i [?] and av-i) out of which
this appears to have sprung. Vedic locatives

from i-stems end also in ā and ī. The pronominal element -sma makes the locative -smin. Stems
in an in the older language often lose the i, and use the bare stem as locative.
j. The ending ām is the locative corerspondent to dat. āi and abl.-gen. ās, and is taken
under the same circumstances: see above.
k. The vocative (unless by accent: 314) is distinguished from the nominative only in the
singular, and not quite always there. In a-stems, it is the unaltered stem, and so also in most
consonant-stems; but neuters in an and in may drop the n; and the oldest language has
sometimes a vocative in s from stems in nt and ṅs. Stems in ṛ change this to ar. In masc. and
fem. i- and u-stems, the case ends respectively in e and o; in neuters, in the same or in i or u.
Stems in ā change ā to e; derivative ī and ū are shortened; radical stems in long vowels use
the nominative form.
308. Dual. a. The dual has—except so far as the vocative is sometimes distinguished from
nominative and accusative by a difference of accent: 314—only three case-forms: one for nom.,
accus., and voc.; one for instr., dat. and abl.; and one for gen. and loc.
b. But the pronouns of 1st and 2d person in the older language distinguish five dual cases:
see 492 b.
c. The masc. and fem. endings for nom.-accus.-voc. is in the later language usually āu; but
instead of this the Veda has prevailingly ā. Stems in ā make the case end in e. Stems in i and
u, masc. and fem., lengthen those vowels; and derivative ī in the Veda remains regularly
unchanged, though later it adds āu. The neuter ending is only ī; with final a this combines to
e.
d. The universal ending for the instr.-dat.-abl. is bhyām, before which final a is made long.
In the Veda, it is often to be read as two syllables, bhiām.
e. The universal ending of gen.-loc. is os; before this, a and ā alike become e (ai).
309. Plural. a. In the nominative, the general masculine and feminine ending is as. The old
language, however, often makes the case āsas instead of ās from a-stems, and in a few
examples also from ā-stems. From derivative ī-stems, īs instead of yas is the regular and usual
Vedic form. Pronominal a-stems make the mas. nom. in e.
b. The neuter ending (which is accusative also) is in general i; and before this the final of a
stem is apt to be strengthened, by prolongation of a vowel, or by insertion of a nasal, or by
both. But in the Veda the hence resulting forms in āni, īni, ūni are frequently abbreviated by
loss of the ni, and sometimes by further shortening of the preceding vowel.

c. The accusative ending is also as in consonant-stems and in the radical division of ī- and
ū-stems (and in the old language even elsewhere). Stems in short vowels lengthen those vowels
and add in the masculine n (for ns, of which abundant traces remain), and in the feminine s. In
the neuter, this case is like the nominative.
d. In the instrumental, the case-ending is everywhere bhis except in a-stems, where in the
later language the case always ends in āis, but in the earlier either in ais or the more regular
ebhis (ābhis in the two personal pronouns; and the pronominal stem a [501] makes ebhis only).
e. The dative and ablative have in the plural the same form, with the ending bhyas (in the
Veda often bhias), before which only a is altered, becoming e. But the two personal pronouns
distinguish the two cases, having for the ablative the singular ending (as above pointed out),
and for the dative the peculiar bhyam (almost never in Veda bhiam), which they extend also
into the singular.
f. Of the genitive, the universal ending is ām; which (except optionally after radical ī and ū,
and in a few scattering Vedic instances) takes after the final vowels an inserted consonant, s in
the pronominal declension, n elsewhere; before n, a short vowel is lengthened; before s, a
becomes e. In the Veda, it is frequently to be pronounced in two syllables, as a-am.
g. The locative ending is su, without any exceptions, and the only change before it is that
of a to e.
h. The vocative, as in the dual, differs from the nominative only by its accent.
310. The normal scheme of endings,as recognized by the native grammarians (and
conveniently to be assumed as the basis of special descriptions), is this:
Singular.
Dual.
Plural.
m. f.
n.
m. f.
n.
m. f.
n.
N.
s
-
āu
ī
as
i
A.
am
-
āu
ī
as
i
I.
ā
bhyām
bhis
D.
e
bhyām
bhyas
Ab.
as
bhyām
bhyas
G.
as
os
ām
L.
i
os
su
a. It is taken in bulk by the consonantal stems and by the radical divisions of ī- and ū-
stems; by other vowel-stems, with more or less considerable variations and modifications. The
endings which have almost or quite unbroken range, through stems of all classes, are bhyām
and os of the dual, and bhis, bhyas, ām, and su of the plural.

311. Variations of Stem. a. By far the most important matter under this head is the
distinction made in large classes of words (chiefly those ending in consonants) between strong
and weak stem-forms—a distinction standing in evident connection with the phenomena of
accent. In the nom. and accus. sing. and du. and the nom. pl., (the five cases whose endings
are never accented: 316 a), the stem often has a stronger or fuller form than in the rest: thus,
for example (424), राजानम् rājān-am, राजानौ rājān-āu, राजानस् rājān-as, against राा rājñ-ā and
राजिभस् rājabhis; or (450 b) महाम् mahā́nt-am and (447) अदम् adánt-am against महता mahat-ā́
and अदता adat-ā́. These five, therefore, are called the cases with strong stem, or, briefly, the
strong cases; and the rest are called the cases with weak stem, or the weak cases. And the
weak cases, again, are in some classes of words to be distinguished into cases of weakest stem,
or weakest cases, and cases of middle stem, or middle cases: the former having endings
beginning with a vowel (instr., dat., abl.-gen., and loc. sing.; gen.-loc. du.; gen. pl.); the latter,
with a consonant (instr.-dat.-abl. du; instr., dat.-abl., and loc. pl.).
b. The class of strong cases, as above defined, belongs only to masculine and feminine
stems. In neuter inflection, the only strong cases are the nom.-acc. pl.; while, in those stems
that make a distinction of weakest and middle form, the nom.-acc. du. belongs to the weakest
class, and the nom.-acc. sing. to the middle: thus, for example, compare (408) ि pratyáñc-i,
nom.-acc. pl. neut., and स् pratyáñc-as, nom. pl. masc.; तीची pratīc-ī́, nom.-acc. du. neut.,
and तीचोस् pratīc-ós, gen.-loc. du.; क pratyák, nom.-acc. sing. neut., and िभस् pratyág-bhis,
instr. pl.
312. Other variations concern chiefly the final vowel of a stem, and may be mainly left to
be pointed out in detail below. Of consequence

enough to mention here is only the guṇa-strengthening of a final i or u, which in the later
language is always made before as of nom. pl. and e of dat. sing. in masc. and fem.; in the
Veda, it does not always take place; nor is it forbidden in dat. sing. neut. also; and it is seen
sometimes in loc. sing. Final ṛ has guṇa-strengthening in loc. sing.
313. Insertions between Stem and Ending. After vowel-stems, an added n often makes its
appearance before an ending. The appendage is of least questionable origin in nom.-acc. pl.
neut., where the interchange in the old language of the forms of a- and i-stems with those of
an- and in-stems is pretty complete; and the u-stems follow their analogy. Elsewhere, it is most
widely and firmly established in the gen. pl., where in the great mass of cases, and from the
earliest period, the ending is virtually nām after a vowel. In the i- and u-stems of the later
language, the instr. sing. of masc. and neut. is separated by its presence from the fem., and it
is in the other weakest cases made a usual distinction of neuter forms from masculine; but the
aspect of the matter in the Veda is very different: there the appearance of the n is everywhere
sporadic; the neuter shows no special inclination to take it, and it is not excluded even from
the feminine. In the ending ena from a-stems (later invariable, earlier predominating) its
presence appears to have worked the most considerable transformation of original shape.
a. The place of n before gen. pl. ām is taken by s in pronominal a- and ā-stems.
b. The y after ā before the endings āi, ās, and ām is most probably an insertion, such as is
made elsewhere (258).
Accent in Declension.
314. a. As a rule without exception, the vocative, if accented at all, is accented on the first
syllable.
b. And in the Veda (the case is a rare one), whenever a syllable written as one is to be
pronounced as two by restoration of a semivowel to vowel form, the first element only has the
vocative accent, and the syllable as written is circumflex (83–4): thus, dyāùs (i.e. díāus) when
dissyllabic, but dyāús when monosyllabic; jyā̀ke when for jíāke.
c. But the vocative is accented only when it stands at the beginning of a sentence—or, in
verse, at the beginning also of a metrical division or pāda; elsewhere it is accentless or enclitic:
thus, ágne yáṁ yajñám paribhū́r ási  (RV.) O Agni! whatever offering thou protectest; but úpa
tvā ’gna é ’masi (RV.) unto thee, Agni, we come;;.
d. A word, or more than one word, qualifying a vocative—usually an adjective or appositive
noun, but sometimes a dependent noun in the genitive (very rarely in any other case)—
constitutes, so far as accent is

concerned, a unity with the vocative: thus, (all the examples from RV.) at the beginning of a
pāda, with first syllable of the combination accented, índra bhrātaḥ O brother Indra! rā́jan soma
O king Soma! yáviṣṭha dūta most youthful messenger! hótar yaviṣṭha sukrato most youthful
skilled officer! ū́rjo napāt sahasvan mighty son of strength!—in the interior of a pāda, without
accent, sómāsa indra girvaṇaḥ the somas, O song-loving Indra! tā́v açvinā bhadrahastā supāṇi
ye, O Açvins of propitious and beautiful hands!  ā́ rājānā maha ṛtasya gopā  hither, ye two kingly
guardians of great order!
e. On the other hand, two or more independent or coordinate vocatives at the beginning of
a pāda are regularly and usually both accented: thus, pítar mā́taḥ O father! O mother! ágna
índra váruṇa mítra dévāḥ Agni! Indra! Varuṇa! Mitra! gods! çátamūte çátakrato thou of a
hundred aids! of a hundred arts! vásiṣṭha çúkra dī́divaḥ pā́vaka best, bright, shining, cleansing
one! ū́rjo napād bhádraçoce son of strength, propitiously bright one!  But the texts offer
occasional irregular exceptions both to this and to the preceding rule.
f. For brevity, the vocative dual and plural will be given in the paradigms below along with
the nominative, without taking the trouble to specify in each instance that, if the latter be
accented elsewhere than on the first syllable, the accent of the vocative is different.
315. As regards the other cases, rules for change of accent in declension have to do only
with monosyllables and with stems of more than one syllable which are accented on the final;
for, if a stem be accented on the penult, or any other syllable further back—as is sárpant, vā́ri,
bhágavant, sumánas, sahásravāja—the accent remains upon that syllable through the whole
inflection (except in the vocative, as explained in the preceding paragraph).
a. The only exceptions are a few numeral stems: see 483.
316. Stems accented on the final (including monosyllables) are subject to variations of
accent in declension chiefly in virtue of the fact that some of the endings have, while others
have not, or have in less degree, a tendency themselves to take the accent. Thus:
a. The endings of nominative and accusative singular and dual and of the nominative plural
(that is to say, of the strong cases: 311) have no tendency to take the accent away from the
stem, and are therefore only accented when a final vowel of the stem and the vowel of the
ending are blended together into single vowel or diphthong. Thus, from dattá come dattāú (=
dattá + āu) and dattā́s (= dattá + as); but from nadī́ come nadyāù (= nadī́ + āu) and nadyàs
(= nadī́ + as).
b. All other endings sometimes take the accent; but those beginning with a vowel (i.e. of
the weakest cases: 311) do so more readily than those beginning with a consonant (i.e. of the
middle cases: 311). Thus, from nāús come nāvā́ and nāubhís; from mahánt, however, come
mahatā́ but mahádbhis.

The general rules of accent, then, may be thus stated:
317. In the declension of monosyllabic stems, the accent falls upon the ending in all the
weak cases (without distinction of middle and weakest): thus, nāvā́, nāubhyā́m, nāvā́m, nāuṣú;
vācí, vāgbhís, vācā́m, vākṣú.
a. But some monosyllabic stems retain the accent throughout: thus, góbhis, gávām, góṣu.
For such cases, see below, 350, 361 c, d, 372, 390, 427. And in the acc. pl. the stem is even
oftener accented than the ending, some words also admitting either accentuation.
318. Of polysyllabic stems ending in consonants, only a few shift the accent to the ending,
and that in the weakest (not the middle) cases. Such are:
a. Present participles in ánt or át: thus, from tudánt, tudatā́ and tudatós and tudatā́m; but
tudádbhyām and tudátsu.
b. A few adjectives having the form of such participles, as mahatā́, bṛhatás.
c. Stems of which the accented final loses its syllable character by syncopation of the vowel:
thus, majjñā́, mūrdhné, dāmnás (from majján etc.: 423).
d. Other sporadic cases will be noticed under the different declensions.
e. Case-forms used adverbially sometimes show a changed accent: see 1110 ff.
319. Of polysyllabic stems ending in accented short vowels, the final of the stem retains the
accent if it retains its syllabic identity: thus, datténa and dattā́ya from dattá; agnínā and
agnáye from agní; and also dattébhyas, agníbhyas, and so on. Otherwise, the accent is on the
ending: and that, whether the final and the ending are combined into one, as in dattāís,
dhenāú, agnī́n, dhenū́s, and so on; or whether the final is changed into a semivowel before the
ending: thus, dhenvā́, pitrā́, jāmyós, bāhvós, etc.
a. But ām of the gen. pl. from stems in í and ú and ṛ́ may, and in the older language
always does, take the accent, though separated by n from the stem: thus, agnīnā́m, dhenūnā́m,
pitṝṇā́m. In RV., even derivative ī-stems show usually the same shift: thus, bahvīnā́m. Of stems
in á, only numerals (483 a) follow this rule: thus, saptānā́m, daçānā́m.
320. Root-words in ī and ū as final members of compounds retain the accent throughout,
not shifting it to any of the endings. And in the older language there are polysyllable words in
long final vowels which follow in this respect as in others the analogy of the root-declension
(below, 355 ff.). Apart from these, the treatment of stems in derivative long vowels is, as
regards accent, the same as those in short vowels—save that the tone is not thrown forward
upon the ending in gen. plural.

CHAPTER V.
NOUNS AND ADJECTIVES.
321. a. The accordance in inflection of substantive and adjective stems is so complete that
the two cannot be separated in treatment from one another.
b. They may be classified, for convenience of description, as follows:
I. Stems in अ a;
II. Stems in इ i and उ u;
III. Stems in आ ā, ई ī, and ऊ ū: namely, A. radical-stems (and a few others inflected like
them); B. derivative stems;
IV. Stems in ऋ ṛ (or अ ar);
V. Stems in consonants.
c. There is nothing absolute in this classification and arrangement; it is merely believed to
be open to as few objections as any other. No general agreement has been reached among
scholars as to the number and order of Sanskrit declensions. The stems in a are here treated
first because of the great predominance of the class.
322. The division-line between substantive and adjective, always an uncertain one in early
Indo-European language, is even more wavering in Sanskrit than elsewhere. There are,
however, in all the declensions as divided above—unless we except the stems in ṛ or ar—words
which are distinctly adjectives; and, in general, they are inflected precisely like noun-stems of
the same final: only, among consonant-stems, there are certain sub-classes of adjective stems
with peculiarities of inflection to which there is among nouns nothing corresponding. But there
are also two considerable classes of adjective-compounds, requiring special notice: namely—
323. Compound adjectives having as final member a bare verbal root, with the value of a
present participle (383 a ff.): thus, su-dṛ́ç well-looking; pra-búdh foreknowing; a-drúh not hating;
veda-víd Veda-knowing; vṛtra-hán Vritra-slaying; upastha-sád sitting in the lap . Every root is
liable to be used in this way, and such compounds are not infrequent in all ages of the
language: see chapter on Compounds, below (1269).

a. This class is essentially only a special class of compound adjectives, since in the earliest
Veda the simple as well as the compounded root was sometimes used adjectively. But the
compounded root was from the beginning much more often so used, and the later the more
exclusively, so that practically the class is a separate and important one.
324. Compound adjectives having a noun as final member, but obtaining an adjective sense
secondarily, by having the idea of possession added, and being inflected as adjectives in the
three genders (1293 ff.). Thus, prajā́kāmá desire of progeny, whence the adjective prajā́kāma,
meaning desirous (i.e. having desire) of progeny; sabhārya (sa+bhāryā) having one's wife along;
and so on.
a. In a few cases, also, the final noun is syntactically object of the preceding member (1309–
10): thus, atimātra immoderate (ati mātram beyond measure) ; yāvayáddveṣas driving away
enemies.
325. Hence, under each declension, we have to notice how a root or a noun-stem of that
declension is inflected when final member of an adjective compound.
a. As to accent, it needs only to be remarked here that a root-word ending a compound has
the accent, but (320) loses the peculiarity of monosyllabic accentuation, and does not throw the
tone forward upon the ending (except añc in certain old forms: 410).
Declension I.
Stems (masculine and neuter) in अ a.
326. a. This declension contains the majority of all the declined stems of the language.
b. Its endings deviate more widely than any others from the normal.
327. Endings: Singular. a. The nom. masc. has the normal ending s.
b. The acc. (masc. and neut.) adds m (not am); and this form has the office also of nom.
neuter.
c. The instr. changes a to ena uniformly in the later language; and even in the oldest Vedic
this is the predominant ending (in RV., eight ninths of all cases). Its final is in Vedic verse
frequently made long (enā). But the normal ending ā — thus, yajñā́ , suhávā, mahitvā́ (for
yajñéna etc.) — is also not rare in the Veda.
d. The dat. has āya (as if by adding aya to a), alike in all ages of the language.
e. The abl. has t (or doubtless d: it is impossible from the evidence of the Sanskrit to tell
which is the original form of the ending),

before which ā is made long: this ending is found in no other noun-declension, and elsewhere
only in the personal pronouns (of all numbers).
f. The gen. has sya added to the final a; and this ending is also limited to a-stems (with the
single exception of the pronoun amúṣya: 501). Its final a is in only three cases made long in the
Veda; and its y is vocalized (asia) almost as rarely.
g. The loc. ends in e (as if by combining the normal ending i with the final of the stem),
without exception.
h. The voc. is the bare stem.
328. Dual. a. The dual endings in general are the normal ones.
b. The nom., acc., and voc. masc. end in the later language always in āu. In the Veda,
however, the usual ending is simple ā (in RV., in seven eights of the occurrences). The same
cases in the neut. end in e, which appears to be the result of fusion of the stem-final with the
normal ending ī.
c. The instr., dat., and abl. have bhyām (in only one or two Vedic instances resolved into
bhiām), with the stem-final lengthened to ā before it.
d. The gen. and loc. have a y inserted after the stem-final before os (or as if the a had
been changed to e). In one or two (doubtful) Vedic instances (as also in the pronominal forms
enos and yos), os is substituted for the final a.
329. Plural. a. The nom. masc. has in the later language the normal ending as combined
with the final a to ās. But in the Veda the ending āsas instead is frequent (one third of the
occurrences in RV., but only one twenty-fifth in the peculiar parts of AV.).
b. The acc. masc. ends in ān (for earlier āns, of which abundant traces are left in the Veda,
and, under the disguise of apparent euphonic combination, even in the later language: see
above, 208 ff.).
c. The nom. and acc. neut. have in the later language always the ending āni (like the an-
stems: see 421; or else with n, as in the gen. pl., before normal i). But in the Veda this ending
alternates with simple ā (which in RV. is to āni as three to two, in point of frequency; in AV.,
as three to four).
d. The instr. ends later always in āis; but in the Veda is found abundantly the more normal
form ebhis (in RV., nearly as frequently as āis; in AV., only one fifth as frequent).
e. The dat. and abl. have bhyas as ending, with e instead of the final a before it (as in the
Vedic instr. ebhis, the loc. pl., the gen. loc. du. [?], and the instr. sing.). The resolution into
ebhias is not infrequent in the Veda.
f. The gen. ends in ānām, the final a being lengthened and having n inserted before the
normal ending. The ā of the ending is not seldom (in less than half the instances) to be read as
two syllables, aam: opinions are divided as to whether the resolution is historical or metric
only. A


very small number (half-a-dozen) of examples of simple ām as ending instead of ānām occur in
RV.
g. The loc. ends in eṣu—that is to say, with the normal ending, before which the stem-final
is changed to e (with consequent change of s to ṣ: 180).
h. Of accent, in this declension, nothing requires to be said; the syllable accented in the
stem retains its own accent throughout.
330. Examples of declension. As examples of the inflection of a-stems may be taken काम
kā́ma m. love; देव devá m. god; आ āsyà n. mouth.
Singular:
N.
कामस्
kā́mas
देवस्
devás
आम्
āsyàm
A.
कामम्
kā́mam
देवम्
devám
आम्
āsyàm
I.
कामेन
kā́mena
देवेन
devéna
आेन
āsyèna
D.
कामाय
kā́māya
देवाय
devā́ya
आाय
āsyā̀ya
Ab.
कामात्
kā́māt
देवात्
devā́t
आात्
āsyā̀t
G.
काम
kā́masya
देव
devásya
आ
āsyàsya
L.
कामे
kā́me
देवे
devé
आे
āsyè
V.
काम
kā́ma
देव
déva
आ
ā́sya
Dual:
N. A. V.
कामौ
kā́māu
देवौ
devāú
आे
āsyè
I. D. Ab.
कामााम्
kā́mābhyām
देवााम्
devā́bhyām
आााम्
āsyā̀bhyām
G. L.
कामयोस्
kā́mayos
देवयोस्
deváyos
आयोस्
āsyàyos
Plural:
N. V.
कामास्
kā́mās
देवास्
devā́s
आािन
āsyā̀ni

A.
कामान्
kā́mān
देवान्
devā́n
आािन
āsyā̀ni
I.
कामैस्
kā́māis
देवैस्
devāís
आैस्
āsyāìs
D. Ab.
कामेस्
kā́mebhyas
देवेस्
devébhyas
आेस्
āsyèbhyas
G.
कामानाम्
kā́mānām
देवानाम्
devā́nām
आानाम्
āsyā̀nām
L.
कामेषु
kā́meṣu
देवेषु
devéṣu
आेषु
āsyèṣu
Examples of the peculiar Vedic forms are:
a. Sing.: instr. raváthenā, yajñā́ (such genitive forms as áçvasiā are purely sporadic).
b. Du.: nom. etc. masc. devā́; gen.-loc. pastyòs (stem pastyà).
c. Pl.: nom.-voc. masc. devā́sas; neut. yugā́; instr. devébhis; gen. caráthām, devā́naam.
331. Among nouns, there are no irregularities in this declension. For irregular numeral
bases in a (or an), see 483-4. For the irregularities of pronominal stems in a, which are more
or less fully shared also by a few adjectives of pronominal kindred, see the chapter on
Pronouns (495 ff.).
Adjectives.
332. Original adjectives in a are an exceedingly large class, the great majority of all
adjectives. There is, however, no such thing as a feminine stem in a; for the feminine, the a is
changed to ā—or often, though far less often, to ī; and its declension is then like that of senā
o r devī (364). An example of the complete declension of an adjective a-stem in the three
genders will be given below (368).
a. Whether a masc.-neut. stem in a shall form its feminine in ā or in ī is a question to be
determined in great part only by actual usage, and not by grammatical rule. Certain important
classes of words, however, can be pointed out which take the less common ending ī of the
feminine: thus, 1. the (very numerous) secondary derivatives in a with vṛddhi of the first
syllable (1204): e.g. āmitrá -trī́, mā́nuṣa -ṣī, pāvamāná -nī́, pāurṇamāsá -sī́; 2. primary derivatives
i n ana with accent on the radical syllable (1150): e.g. códana -nī, saṁgráhaṇa -ṇī,
subhāgaṁkáraṇa -nī; 3. primary derivatives in a, with strengthening of the radical syllable,
having a quasi-participial meaning: e.g. divākará -rī, avakrāmá -mī́,

rathavāhá -hī́ (but there are many exceptions); 4. secondary derivatives in maya (1225) and
tana (1245 e): e.g. ayasmáya -yī; adyatana -nī; 5. most ordinal numbers (487 h): e.g. pañcamá -
mī́, navadaçá -çī́, triṅçattamá -mī́. Not a few words make the feminine in either ā or ī: e.g.
kévalā or -lī, ugrā́ or -rī́, pāpā or -pī́, rāmā́ or -mī́; but ordinarily only one of these is accepted
as regular.
333. There are no verbal roots ending in a. But a is sometimes substituted for the final ā of
a root (and, rarely, for a final an), and it is then inflected like an ordinary adjective in a (see
below, 354).
334. a. A noun ending in a, when occurring as final member of an adjective compound, is
inflected like an original adjective in a, making its feminine likewise in ā or ī (367).
b. For the most part, an adjective compound having a noun in a as final member makes its
feminine in ā. But there are numerous exceptions, certain nouns taking, usually or always, ī
instead. Some of the commonest of these are as follows: akṣa eye (e.g. lohitākṣī, dvyakṣī,
gavākṣī) , parṇa leaf (e.g. tilaparṇī, saptaparṇī; but ekaparṇā) , mukha face (e.g. kṛṣṇamukhī,
durmukhī; but trimukhā etc.), an̄ga limb, body (e.g. anavadyān̄gī, sarvān̄gī; but caturan̄gā etc.),
keça hair (e.g. sukeçī, muktakeçī or -çā, etc.), karṇa ear (e.g. mahākarṇī; but gokarṇā etc.),
udara belly (e.g. lambodarī) , mūla root (e.g. pañcamūlī; but oftener çatámūlā etc.). The very
great majority of such nouns (as the examples indicate) signify parts of the body.
c. On the other hand, a feminine noun ending in derivative ā shortens its final to a to form
a masculine and neuter base: see 367 c.
d. In frequent cases, nouns of consonant ending are, as finals of compounds, transferred to
the a-declension by adding suffix a (1209 a) or ka (1222).
Declension II.
Stems (of all genders) in इ i and उ u.
335. The stems in इ i and उ u are inflected in so close accordance with one another that
they cannot be divided into two separate declensions. They are of all the three genders, and
tolerably numerous—those in इ i more numerous than those in उ u, especially in the feminine
(there are more neuters in उ u than in इ i).
a. The endings of this declension also differ frequently and widely from the normal, and the
irregularities in the older language are numerous.

336. Endings: Singular. a. The nom. masc. and fem. adds to the stem the normal ending s.
The nom. and acc. neut. is the bare stem, without ending. In the Veda, the final u of a few
neuters is lengthened (248 b): thus, urū́, purū́.
b. The acc. masc. and fem. adds m to the stem. Vedic forms in iam and uam, and, with n,
inam and unam, are excessively rare, and doubtful.
c. The instr. fem. in the later language takes the normal ending ā simply, while the masc.
and neut. insert n before it, making inā and unā. But in the Veda, forms in yā and vā (or iā
and uā) are not infrequent in masc. and neut. also; while inā is found, very rarely, as a fem.
ending. Moreover, fem. yā is often (in two thirds of the occurrences) contracted to ī; and this is
even sometimes shortened to i. An adverbial instr. in uyā́ from half-a-dozen stems in u occurs.
d. The dat. masc. and fem. gunates the final of the stem before the ending e, making aye
and ave. These are the prevailing endings in the Veda likewise; but the more normal ye and ve
(or ue) also occur; and the fem. has in this case, as in the instr., sometimes the form ī for ie.
In the later language, the neuter is required in this, as in all the other weakest cases, to insert
n before the normal ending: but in the Veda such forms are only sporadic; and the neut. dat.
has also the forms aye, ve, ave, like the other genders.
e. The abl. and gen. masc. and fem. have regularly, both earlier and later, the ending s with
gunated vowel before it: thus, es, os; and in the Veda, the neut. forms the cases in the same
way; although unas, required later, is also not infrequent ( inas does not occur). But the normal
forms yas (or ias) and vas (or uas) are also frequent in both masc. and neut. As masc. ending,
unas occurs twice in RV. The anomalous didyót (so TS.; in the corresponding passages, vidyót
VS., didyāut K., didivás MS.) is of doubtful character.
f. The loc. masc. and fem. has for regular ending in the later language āu, replacing both
finals, i and u. And this is in the Veda also the most frequent ending; but, beside it, the i-stems
form (about half as often in RV.) their loc. in ā: thus, agnā́; and this is found once even in the
neuter. The RV. has a number of examples of masc. and neut. locatives in avi (the normal
ending and the u gunated before it) from u-stems; and certain doubtful traces of a
corresponding ayi from i-stems. Half-a-dozen locatives in ī (regarded by the Vedic grammarians
a s pragṛhya or uncombinable: 138 d) are made from i-stems. The later language makes the
neuter locative in ini and uni; but the former never occurs in the oldest texts, and the latter
only very rarely.
g. The later grammar allows the dat., abl.-gen., and loc. fem. to be formed at will with the
fuller fem. terminations of long-vowel stems, namely āi, ās (for which, in Brāhmaṇa etc., āi is
substituted: 307 h), ām. Such forms are quite rare in the oldest language even from i-stems
(less than 40 occurrences altogether in RV.; three times as many in AV.); and from u-stems they
are almost unknown (five in RV. and AV.).

h. The voc. gunates the final of the stem, in masc. and fem., alike in the earlier and in the
later language. In the neut., it is later allowed to be either of the same form or the unaltered
stem; and this was probably the usage in the older time also; not instances enough quotable to
determine the question (AV. has u once, and VS. o once).
337. Dual. a. The later and earlier language agree in making the nom.-acc.-voc. masc. and
fem. by lengthening the final of the stem. The same cases in the neuter (according to the rules
given above) end later in inī and unī; but these endings are nearly unknown in the Veda (as,
indeed, the cases are of only rare occurrence): AV. has inī twice (RV. perhaps once); VS. has
unī once; RV. has uī from one u-stem, and ī, once shortened to i, from one or two i-stems.
b. The unvarying ending of instr.-dat.-abl., in all genders, is bhyām added to the unchanged
stem.
c. The gen.-loc. of all ages add os to the stem in masc. and fem.; in the neut., the later
language interposes, as elsewhere in the weakest cases, a n; probably in the earlier Vedic the
form would be like that of the other genders; but the only occurrence noted is one unos in AV.
338. Plural. a. The nom.-voc. masc. and fem. adds the normal ending as to the gunated
stem-final, making ayas and avas. The exceptions in the Veda are very few: one word ( ari) has
ias in both genders, and a few feminines have īs (like ī-stems); a very few u-stems have uas.
The neut. nom.-acc. ends later in īni and ūni (like āni from a: 329 c); but the Veda has ī and i
(about equally frequent) much oftener than īni; and ū and (more usually) u, more than half as
often as ūni.
b. The accus. masc. ends in īn and ūn, for older īns and ūns, of which plain traces remain
in the Veda in nearly half the instances of occurrence, and even not infrequently in the later
language, in the guise of phonetic combination (208 ff.). The accus. fem. ends in īs and ūs. But
both masc. and fem. forms in ias and uas are found sparingly in the Veda.
c. The instr. of all genders adds bhis to the stem.
d. The dat.-abl. of all genders adds bhyas (in V., almost never bhias) to the stem.
e. The gen. of all genders is made alike in īnām and ūnām (of which the ā is not seldom, in
the Veda, to be resolved into aam). Stems with accented final in the later language may, and in
the earlier always do, throw forward the accent upon the ending.
f. The loc. of all genders adds su (as ṣu: 180) to the stem-final.
g. The accent is in accordance with the general rules already laid down, and there are no
irregularities calling for special notice.
399. Examples of declension. As models of i-stems may be taken अि agní m. fire; गित gáti f.
gait; वािर vā́ri n. water.

Singular:
N.
अिस्
agnís
गितस्
gátis
वािर
vā́ri
A.
अिम्
agním
गितम्
gátim
वािर
vā́ri
I.
अिना
agnínā
गा
gátyā
वािरणा
vā́riṇā
D.
अये
agnáye
गतये, गै
gátaye, gátyāi
वािरणे
vā́riṇe
Ab. G.
अेस्
agnés
गतेस्, गास्
gátes, gátyās
वािरणस्
vā́riṇas
L.
अौ
agnāú
गतौ, गाम्
gátāu, gátyām
वािरिण
vā́riṇi
V.
अे
ágne
गते
gáte
वािर, वारे
vā́ri, vā́re
Dual:
N. A. V.
अी
agnī́
गती
gátī
वािरणी
vā́rīṇī
I. D. Ab.
अिाम्
agníbhyām
गिताम्
gátibhyām
वािराम्
vā́ribhyām
G. L.
अोस्
agnyós
गोस्
gátyos
वािरणोस्
vā́riṇos
Plural:
N. V.
अयस्
agnáyas
गतयस्
gátayas
वारीिण
vā́riṇi
A.
अीन्
agnī́n
गतीस्
gátīs
वारीणी
vā́rīṇī
I.
अििभस्
agníbhis
गितिभस्
gátibhis
वािरिभस्
vā́ribhis
D. Ab.
अिस्
agníbhyas
गितस्
gátibhyas
वािरस्
vā́ribhyas
G.
अीनाम्
agnīnā́m
गतीनाम्
gátīnām
वारीणाम्
vā́rīṇām
L.
अिषु
agníṣu
गितषु
gátiṣu
वािरषु
vā́riṣu

340. In order to mark more plainly the absence in Vedic language of some of the forms
which are common later, all the forms of Vedic occurrence are added below, and in the order
of their frequency.
a. Singular. Nom. agnís etc., as above.
b. Acc.: masc. agním, yayíam, ūrmíṇam (?); fem. and neut. as above.
c. Instr.: masc. agnínā, rayyā́ and ūrmiā́; fem. ácittī, ūtiā́, matyā́, suvṛktí, dhāsínā; neut.
wanting.
d. Dat.: masc. agnáye; fem. tujáye, ūtī́, turyāí; neut. çúcaye.
e. Gen.-abl.: masc. agnés, ávyas, ariás; fem. ádites, hetyā́s and bhū́miās; neut. bhū́res.
f. Loc.: masc. agnāú, agnā́, ājáyi (?); fem. ā́gatāu, úditā, dhánasātayi (?), védī, bhū́myām;
neut. apratā́, saptáraçmāu.
g. Voc.: as above (neut wanting).
h. Dual. Nom.-acc.-voc.: masc. hárī; fem. yuvatī́; neut. çúcī, máhi, háriṇī (?).
i. Instr.-dat.-abl.: as above.
j. Gen.-loc.: masc. hários; fem. yuvatyós and jāmiós; neut. wanting.
k. Plural. Nom.: masc. agnáyas; fem. matáyas, bhū́mīs; neut. çúcī, bhū́ri, bhū́rīṇi.
l. Accus.: masc. agnī́n; fem. kṣitī́s, çúcayas (?).
m. Instr., dat.-abl, and loc., as above.
n. Gen.: masc. fem. kavīnā́m, ṛ́ṣīṇaam etc. (neut. wanting).
341. As models of u-stems may be taken शु çátru m. enemy; धेनु dhenú f. cow; मधु mádhu n.
honey.
Singular:
N.
शुस्
çátrus
धेनुस्
dhenús
मधु
mádhu
A.
शुम्
çátrum
धेनुम्
dhenúm
मधु
mádhu
I.
शुणा
çátruṇā
धेा
dhenvā́
मधुना
mádhunā
D.
शवे
çátrave
धेनवे, धेै
dhenáve, dhenvāí
मधुने
mádhune
Ab. G.
शोस्
çátros
धेनोस्, धेास्
dhenós, dhenvā́s
मधुनस्
mádhunas
L.
शौ
çátrāu
धेनौ, धेाम्
dhenāú, dhenvā́m
मधुिन
mádhuni
शो
धेनो
मधु, मधो

V.
çátro
dhéno
mádhu, mádho

Dual:
N. A. V.
शू
çátrū
धेनू
dhenū́
मधुनी
mádhunī
I. D. Ab.
शुाम्
çátrubhyām
धेनुाम्
dhenúbhyām
मधुाम्
mádhubhyām
G. L.
शवोस्
çátrvos
धेोस्
dhenvós
मधुनोस्
mádhunos
Plural:
N. V.
शवस्
çátravas
धेनवस्
dhenávas
मधूिन
mádhūni
A.
शून्
çátrūn
धेनूस्
dhenū́s
मधूिन
mádhūni
I.
शुिभस्
çátrubhis
धेनुिभस्
dhenúbhis
मधुिभस्
mádhubhis
D. Ab.
शुस्
çátrubhyas
धेनुस्
dhenúbhyas
मधुस्
mádhubhyas
G.
शूणाम्
çátrūṇām
धेनूनाभ्
dhenūnā́m
मधूनाभ्
mádhūnām
L.
शुषु
çátruṣu
धेनुषु
dhenúṣu
मधुषु
mádhuṣu
342. The forms of Vedic occurrence are given here for the u-stems in the same manner as
for the i-stems above.
a. Singular. Nom.: masc. and fem. as above; neut. urú, urū́.
b. Accus.: masc. ketúm, ábhīruam, sucetúnam (?); fem. dhenúm.
c. Instr.: masc. ketúnā, paçvā́ and krátuā; fem. ádhenuā and panvā́, āçuyā́; neut. mádhunā,
mádhvā.
d. Dat.: masc. ketáve, çíçve; fem. çárave, íṣvāi; neut. páçve (?), uráve, mádhune.
e. Abl.-gen.: masc. manyós, pitvás, cā́ruṇas; 
fem. síndhos, íṣvās; 
neut. mádhvas and
mádhuas, mádhos, mádhunas.
f. Loc.: masc. pūrāú, sūnávi; fem. síndhāu, rájjvām; neut. sā́nāu, sā́navi, sā́no, sā́nuni.
g. Voc.: as above.
h. Dual. Nom.-acc.-voc.: masc. and fem. as above; neut. urvī́, jā́nunī.
i. Instr.-dat.-abl.: as above.
j. Gen.-loc.: as above (but vos or uos).
k. Plural. Nom.: masc. ṛbhávas, mádhuas and mádhvas; fem. dhenávas, çatakratvas; neut.
purū́ṇi, purú, purū́.

l. Accus.: masc. ṛtū́n, paçvás; fem. íṣūs, mádhvas.
m. Instr., dat.-abl., and loc., as above; also gen. (but with the resolution ūnaam in part).
343. Irregular declension. There are no irregular u-stems, and only a very few i-stems.
a. Sákhi m. friend has for the five strong cases a peculiarly strengthened base (vriddhied),
namely sákhāy, which in the nom. sing. is reduced to sákhā (without ending), and in the other
cases takes the normal endings. The instr. and dat. sing. have the normal endings simply,
without inserted n or guṇa; the abl.-gen. sing. adds us; and the loc. sing. adds āu: the rest is
like agní. Thus:
Sing. sákhā, sákhāyam, sákhyā, sákhye, sákhyus, sákhyāu, sákhe; Du. sákhāyāu, sákhibhyām,
sákhyos; Pl. sákhāyas, sákhīn, etc. etc.
b. The Veda has usually sákhāyā du., and often resolves the y to i, in sákhiā, sákhius, etc.
The compounds are usually declined like the simple word, unless (1315 b) sakha be substituted.
c. There is a corresponding fem., sakhī (declined like devī: 364); but the forms of sakhi are
also sometimes found used with feminine value.
d. Páti m. is declined regularly in composition, and when it has the meaning lord, master;
when uncompounded and when meaning husband, it is inflected like sákhi in the instr., dat.,
abl.-gen., and loc. sing., forming pátyā, pátye, pátyus, pátyāu. There are occasional instances of
confusion of the two classes of forms.
e. For pati as the final member of a possessive compound is regularly and usually
substituted patnī in the fem.: thus, jīvapatnī having a living husband; dāsapatnī having a
barbarian for master.
f. Jáni f. wife has the gen. sing. jányus in the Veda.
g. Arí eager, greedy, hostile has in the Veda aryás in pl. nom. and accus., masc. and fem.
Its accus. sing. is arím or aryám.
h. Ví bird has in RV. the nom. vés (beside vís). In the plural it accents víbhis, víbhyas, but
vīnā́m.
i. The stems ákṣi eye, ásthi bone, dádhi curds, and sákthi thigh, are defective, their forms
exchanging with and complementing forms from stems in án (akṣán etc.): see the stems in an,
below (431).
j. The stem pathí road is used to make up part of the inflection of páthan: see below, 433.
k. Króṣṭu m. jackal lacks the strong cases, for which the corresponding forms of kroṣṭṛ́ are
substituted.
Adjectives.
344. Original adjectives stems in i are few; those in u are much more numerous (many

derivative verb-stems forming a participial ad-

jective in u). Their inflection is like that of nouns, and has been included in the rules given
above. In those weak cases, however—namely, the dat., abl.-gen., and loc. sing., and the gen.-
loc. dual—in which neuter nouns differ from masculines in the later language by an inserted n
(we have seen above that this difference does not exist in the Veda), the neuter adjective is
allowed to take either form. The stem is the same for masculine and neuter, and generally (and
allowably always) for feminine also.
a. There are a few instances of a feminine noun in ī standing (sometimes with changed
accent) beside a masculine in i: thus, krími m., krimī́ f.; sákhi (343 a) m., sakhī́ f.; dundubhí
m., dundubhī f., dhúni m., dhunī f.; çakúni m., çakunī or -ni f. In the later language, especially,
there is a very frequent interchange of i and ī as finals of the same stem. No adjective in i
makes a regular feminine in ī.
b. With stems in u the case is quite different. While the feminine may, and in part does,
end in u, like the masculine and neuter, a special feminine-stem is often made by lengthening
the u to ū, or also by adding ī; and for some stems a feminine is formed in two of these three
ways, or even in all the three: thus, kārū, -dipsū́, çundhyū́, cariṣṇū́, vacasyū́; -aṇvī, urvī́, gurvī,
pūrvī́ (with a prolongation of u before r: compare 245 b), bahvī́, prabhvī́, raghvī́, sādhvī́, svādvī́;
—pṛthú and pṛthvī́, vibhū́ and vibhvī́, mṛdú and mṛdvī́, laghu and laghvī, vásu and vásvī; babhrú
and babhrū́, bībhatsú and bībhatsū́, bhīrú and bhīrū;—tanú and tanū́ and tanvī́, phalgú and
phalgū́ and phalgvī, mádhu and madhū́ and mádhvī. There are also some feminine noun-stems
i n ū standing (usually with changed accent) beside masculines in u: thus, ágru m., agrū́ f.;
kádru m., kadrū́ f.; gúggulu m., guggulū́ f.; jatu m., jatū́ f.; pṛ́dāku m., pṛdākū́ f.
345. Roots ending in i or u (or ṛ: 376 b) regularly add a t when used as root-words or as
root-finals of compounds; and hence there are no adjectives of the root-class in this declension.
a. Yet, in the Veda, a few words ending in a short radical u are declined as if this were
suffixal: thus, ásmṛtadhru, suṣṭú; and the AV. has pṛtanājí (once). Roots in ū sometimes also
shorten ū to u: thus, prabhú, vibhú, etc. (354); go (361 e) becomes gu in composition; and re
perhaps becomes ri (361 e); while roots in ā sometimes apparently weaken ā to i (in -dhi from
√dhā etc.: 1155).
346. Compound adjectives having nouns of this declension as final members are inflected in
general like original adjectives of the same endings.
a. But in such compounds a final i or u is sometimes lengthened to form a feminine stem:
thus, suçroṇī, svayonī or -ni, -gātrayaṣṭī or -ṭi; vāmorū or -ru, durhaṇū or -ṇu, varatanū,
mātṛbandhū; and RV. has áçiçvī from çíçu.

Declension III.
Stems in long vowels: आ ā, ई ī, ऊ ū.
347. The stems ending in long vowels fall into two well-marked classes or divisions: A.
monosyllabic stems—mostly bare roots—and their compounds, with a comparatively small
number of others inflected like them; B. derivative feminine stems in आ ā and ई ī, with a small
number in ऊ ū which in the later language have come to be inflected like them. The latter
division is by far the larger and more important, since most feminine adjectives, and
considerable classes of feminine nouns, ending in आ ā or ई ī, belong to it.
A. Root-words, and those inflected like them.
348. The inflection of these stems is by the normal endings throughout, or in the manner of
consonant-stems (with अम् am, not म् m, in the accus. sing.); peculiarities like those of the other
vowel-declensions are wanting. The simple words are, as nouns, with few exceptions feminine;
as adjectives (rarely), and in adjective compounds, they are alike in masculine and feminine
forms. They may, for convenience of description, be divided into the following subclasses:
1. Root-words, or monosyllables having the aspect of such. Those in ā are so rare that it is
hardly possible to make up a whole scheme of forms in actual use; those in ī and ū are more
numerous, but still very few.
2. Compounds having such words, or other roots with long final vowels, as last member.
3. Polysyllabic words, of various origin and character, including in the Veda many which
later are transferred to other declensions.
4. As an appendix to this class we may most conveniently describe the half-dozen stems,
mostly of regular inflection, ending in diphthongs.

349. Monosyllabic stems. Before the endings beginning with vowels, final ī is changed to iy
and ū to uv; while final ā is dropped altogether, except in the strong cases, and in the acc. pl.,
which is like the nominative (according to the grammarians, ā is lost here also: no instances of
the occurrence of such a form appear to be quotable). Stems in ī and ū are in the later
language allowed to take optionally the fuller endings āi, ās, ām in the singular (dat., abl.-gen.,
loc.); but no such forms are ever met with in the Veda (except bhiyāí [?], RV., once). Before ām
of gen. pl., n may or may not be inserted; in the Veda it is regularly inserted, with a single
exception (dhiyā́m, once). The vocative is like the nominative in the singular as well as the
other numbers; but instances of its occurrence in uncompounded stems are not found in the
Veda, and must be extremely rare everywhere. The earlier Vedic dual ending is ā instead of āu.
350. To the ī- and ū-stems the rules for monosyllabic accent apply: the accent is thrown
forward upon the endings in all the weak cases except the accus. pl., which is like the nom.
But the ā-stems appear (the instances are extremely few) to keep the accent upon the stem
throughout.
351. Examples of declension. As models of monosyllabic inflection we may take जा jā́ f.
progeny; धी dhī́ f. thought; and भू bhū́ f. earth.
a. The first of these is rather arbitrarily extended from the four cases which actually occur;
of the loc. sing. and gen.-loc. du., no Vedic examples from ā-stems are found.
Singular:
N.
जास्
jā́s
धीस्
dhī́s
भूस्
bhū́s
A.
जाम्
jā́m
िधयम्
dhíyam
भुवम्
bhúvam
I.
जा
jā́
िधया
dhiyā́
भुवा
bhuvā́
D.
जे
jé
िधये, िधयै
dhiyé, dhiyāí
भुवे, भुवै
bhuvé, bhuvāí
Ab. G.
जस्
jás
िधयस्, िधयास्
dhiyás, dhiyā́s
भुवस्, भुवास्
bhuvás, bhuvā́s
L.
िज
jí
िधिय, िधयाम्
dhiyí, dhiyā́m
भुिव, भुवाम्
bhuví, bhuvā́m
V.
जास्
jā́s
धीस्
dhī́s
भूस्
bhū́s

Dual:
N. A. V.
जौ
jāú
िधयौ
dhíyāu
भुवौ
bhúvāu
I. D. Ab.
जााम्
jā́bhyām
धीाम्
dhībhyā́m
भूाम्
bhūbhyā́m
G. L.
जोस्
jós
िधयोस्
dhiyós
भुवोस्
bhuvós
Plural:
N. V.
जास्
jā́s
िधयस्
dhíyas
भुवस्
bhúvas
A.
जास् (जस्?)
jā́s, jás
िधयस्
dhíyas
भुवस्
bhúvas
I.
जािभस्
jā́bhis
धीिभस्
dhībhís
भूिभस्
bhūbhís
D. Ab.
जास्
jā́bhyas
धीस्
dhībhyás
भूस्
bhūbhyás
G.
जानाम् (जाम्?)
jā́nām, jā́m
िधयाभ्, धीनाम्
dhiyā́m, dhīnā́m
भुवाभ्, भूनाभ्
bhuvā́m, bhūnā́m
L.
जासु
jā́su
धीषु
dhīṣú
भूषु
bhūṣú
352. Monosyllabic stems in composition. When the nouns above described occur as a final
member of a compound, or when any root in ā or ī or ū is found in a like position, the
inflection of an ā-stem is as above. But ī- and ū-stems follow a divided usage: the final vowel
before a vowel-ending is either converted into a short vowel and semivowel (iy or uv, as above)
or into a semivowel simply (y or v). The accent is nowhere thrown forward upon the endings;
and therefore, when ī and ū become y and v, the resulting syllable is circumflex (83–4). Thus:
Masc. and fem. Singular:
N. V.
-dhī́s
-bhū́s
A.
-dhíyam
-dhyàm
-bhúvam
-bhvàm
I.
-dhíyā
-dhyā̀
-bhúvā
-bhvā̀
D.
-dhíye
-dhyè
-bhúve
-bhvè
Ab. G.
-dhíyas
-dhyàs
-bhúvas
-bhvàs
L.
-dhíyi
-dhyì
-bhúvi
-bhvì

Dual:
N. A. V.
-dhíyāu
-dhyaù
-bhúvāu
-bhvāù
I. D. Ab.
-dhī́bhyām
-bhū́bhyām
G. L.
-dhíyos
-dhyòs
-bhúvos
-bhvòs
Plural:
N. A. V.
-dhíyas
-dhyàs
-bhúvas
-bhvàs
I.
-dhī́bhis
-bhū́bhis
D. Ab.
-dhī́bhyas
-bhū́bhyas
G.
-dhíyām
-dhyā̀m
-bhúvām
-bhvā̀m
-dhī́nām
-bhū́nām
L.
-dhī́ṣu
-bhū́ṣu
a. As to the admissibility of the fuller endings āi, ās, and ām in the singular (feminine),
grammatical authorities are somewhat at variance; but they are never found in the Veda, and
have been omitted from the above scheme as probably unreal.
b. If two consonants precede the final ī or ū, the dissyllabic forms, with iy and uv, are
regularly written; after one consonant, the usage is varying. The grammarians prescribe iy and
uv when the monosyllabic stem has more the character of a noun, and y and v when it is more
purely a verbal root with participial value. No such distinction, however, is to be seen in the
Veda—where, moreover, the difference of the two forms is only graphic, since the yā- and vā-
forms and the rest are always to be read as dissyllabic: iā or īā and uā or ūā, and so on.
c. As to neuter stems for such adjectives, see 367.
353. A few further Vedic irregularities or peculiarities may be briefly noticed.
a. Of the ā-stems, the forms in ās, ām, ā (du.) are sometimes to be read as dissyllables,
aas, aam, aa. The dative of the stem used as infinitive is āí (as if ā́+e): thus, prakhyāí,
pratimāí, parādāí.
b. Irregular transfer of the accent to the ending in compopunds is seen in a case or two:
thus, avadhyabhiyā́ (RV.), ādhiā́ (AV.).
354. But compounds of the class above described are not infrequently transferred to other
modes of inflection: the ā shortened to a for a masculine (and neuter) stem, or declined like a
stem of the derivative ā-class (below, 364) as feminine; the ī and ū shortened to i and u, and
inflected as of the second declension.
a. Thus, compound stems in -ga, -ja, -da, -stha, -bhu, and others, are found even in the
Veda, and become frequent later (being made from all, or nearly all, the roots in ā); and
sporadic cases from yet others occur: for example, çṛtapā́n, vayodhāís 
and ratnadhébhis,
dhanasāís (all RV.); and, from ī and ū compounds, veṣaçrís (TS.), áhrayas (RV.), gaṇaçríbhis
(RV.), karmaṇís (ÇB), and ṛtaníbhyas (RV.) and senāníbhyas (VS.) and grímaṇíbhis (TB.), supúnā
(AV.), çitíbhráve (TS.).
b. Still more numerous are the feminines in ā which have lost

their root-declension: examples are prajā́ (of which the further compounds in part have root-
forms), svadhā́, çraddhā́, pratimā́, and others.
c. Thus, in the later language, a few feminines in ī are made from the stems in a shortened
from ā: thus, gopī, goṣṭhī, pannagī, pan̄kajī, bhujagī, bhujaṁgī, surāpī.
355. Polysyllabic Stems. Stems of this division (A) of more than one syllable are very rare
indeed in the later language, and by no means common in the earlier. The Rig-Veda, however,
presents a not inconsiderable body of them; and as the class nearly dies out later, by the disuse
of its stems or their transfer to other modes of declension, it may be best described on a Vedic
basis.
a. Of stems in ā, masculines, half-a-dozen occur in the Veda: pánthā, mánthā, and ṛbhukṣā́
are otherwise viewed by the later grammar: see below, 433-4; uçánā (nom. pr.) has the
anomalous nom. sing. uçánā (and loc. as well as dat. uçáne) ; mahā́ great is found only in
accus. sing. and abundantly in composition; ā́tā frame has only ā́tāsu not derivable from ā́ta.
b. Of stems in ī, over seventy are found in the Veda, nearly all feminines, and all accented
on the final. Half of the feminines are formed from masculines with change of accent: thus,
kalyāṇī́ (m. kalyā́ṇa) , puruṣī́ (m. púruṣa); others show no change of accent: thus, yamī́ (m.
yamá); others still have no corresponding masculines: thus, nadī́, lakṣmī́, sūrmī́. The masculines
are about ten in number: for example, rathī́, prāvī́, starī́, ahī́, āpathī́.
c. Of stems in ū, the number is smaller: these, too, are nearly all feminines, and all
accented on the final. The majority of them are the feminine adjectives in ū́ to masculines in ú
or u (above, 344b): thus, caraṇyū́, cariṣṇū́, jighatsū́, madhū́. A few are nouns in ū́, with change
of accent: thus, agrū́ (ágru), pṛdākū́ (pṛ́dāku), çvaçrū́ (çváçura); or without change, as nṛtū́. And
a few have no corresponding masculines: thus, tanū́, vadhū́, camū́. The masculines are only two
ore three: namely, prāçū́, kṛkadāçū́, makṣū́ (?); and their forms are of the utmost rarity.
356. The mode of declension of these words may be illustrated by the following examples:
rathī́ m. charioteer; nadī́ f. stream; tanū́ f. body.
a. No one of the selected examples occurs in all the forms; forms for which no example at
all is quotable are put in brackets. No loc. sing. from any ī-stem occurs, to determine what the
form would be. The stem nadī́ is selected as an example partly in order to emphasize the
difference between the earlier language and the later in regard to the words of this division:
nadī́ is later the model of derivative inflection.

Singular:
N.
rathī́s
nadī́s
tanū́s
A.
rathíam
nadíam
tanúam
I.
rathíā
nadíā
tanúā
D.
rathíe
nadíe
tanúe
Ab. G.
rathías
nadías
tanúas
L.
.....
.....
tanúi
V.
ráthi (?)
nádi
tánu
Dual:
N. A. V.
rathíā
nadíā
tanúā
I. D. Ab.
[rathī́bhyām]
nadī́bhyām
[tanū́bhyām]
G. L.
[rathíos]
nadíos
tanúos
Plural:
N. A.
rathías
nadías
tanúas
I.
[rathī́bhis]
nadī́bhis
tanū́bhis
D. Ab.
[rathī́bhyas]
nadī́bhyas
tanū́bhyas
G.
rathī́nām
nadī́nām
tanū́nām
L.
[rathī́ṣu]
nadī́ṣu
tanū́ṣu
b. The cases — nadíam, tanúam, etc — are written above according to their true phonetic
form, almost invariably belonging to them in the Veda; in the written text, of course, the stem-
final is made a semi-vowel, and the resulting syllable is circumflexed: thus, nadyàm, tanvàm,
etc.; only, as usual, after two consonants the resolved forms iy and uv are written instead; and
also where the combination yv would otherwise result: thus, cakríyā, [agrúvāi,] and mitrāyúvas.
The RV. really reads staryàm etc. twice, and tanvàs etc. four times; and such contractions are
more often made in the AV. The ending ā of the nom.-acc.-voc. du. is the equivalent of the later
āu. The nom. sing. in s from ī-stems is found in the older language about sixty times, from over
thirty stems.
357. Irregularities of form, properly so called, are very few in this division: camū́ as loc.
sing. (instead of camvi) occurs a few times; and there is another doubtful case or two of the
same kind; the final ū́ is regarded as pragṛhya or uncombinable (138); tanúi is lengthened to
tanvī̀ in a passage or two; -yúvas is once or twice abbreviated to - yū́s.
358. The process of transfer to the other form of ī- and ū-declension (below, 362 ff.), which
has nearly extinguished this category of words in the later language, has its beginnings in the
Veda; but in RV. they are excessively scanty: namely, dūtiā́m, loc. sing., once, and çvaçruā́m,
do., once, and dravitnuā́, instr. sing., with two or three other doubtful cases. In the Atharvan,
we find the acc. sing. kuhū́m, tanū́m, vadhū́m; the instr. sing. palāliā́ and one or two others;
the dat. sing. vadhvāí, çvaçruāí, agrúvāi; the abl.-gen. sing. punarbhúvās, pṛdākuā́s, çvaçruā́s;
and the loc. sing. tanúām (with anomalous accent). Accusative plural in īs and ūs are nowhere
met with.

359. Adjective compounds from these words are very few; those which occur are declined
like the simple stems: thus, híraṇyavāçīs and sahásrastarīs, átaptatanūs and sárvatanūs, all nom.
sing. masculine.
Stems ending in diphthongs.
360. There are certain monosyllabic stems ending in diphthongs, which are far too few and
too diverse in infliction to make a declension of, and which may be most appropriately disposed
of here, in connection with the stems in ī and ū, with which they have most affinity. They are:
a. stems in āu: nāú and glāú;
b. stems in āi: rāí;
c. stems in o: gó and dyó (or dyú, dív).
361. a. The stem nāú f. ship is entirely regular, taking the normal endings throughout, and
following the rules for monosyllabic accentuation (317)—except that the accus. pl. is said (it
does not appear to occur in accented texts) to be like the nom. Thus: nāús, nā́vam, nāvā́, nāvé,
nāvás, nāví; nā́vāu, nāubhyā́m, nāvós; nā́vas, nā́vas, nāubhís, nāubhyás, nāvā́m, nāuṣú. The stem
glāú m. ball is apparently inflected in the same way; but few of its forms have been met with
in use.
b. The stem rāí f. (or m.) wealth might be better described as rā with a union-consonant y
(258) interposed before vowel endings, and is regularly inflected as such, with normal endings
and monosyllabic accent. Thus: rā́s, rā́yam, rāyā́, rāyé, rāyás, rāyí; rā́yāu, rābhyā́m, rāyós;
rā́yas, rāyás, rābhís, rābhyás, rāyā́m, rāsú. But in the Veda the accus. pl. is either rāyás or
rā́yas; for accus. sing. and pl. are also used the briefer forms rām (RV. once: rā́yam does not
occur in V.) and rā́s (SV., once); and the gen.-sing. is sometimes anomalously accented rā́yas.
c. The stem gó m. or f. bull or cow is much more irregular. In the strong cases, except
accus. sing., it is strengthened to gāú, forming (like naú) gāús, gā́vāu, gā́vas. In accus. sing.
and pl. it has (like rāí) the brief forms gā́m and gā́s. The abl.-gen. sing. is gós (as if from gu).
The rest is regularly made from go, with the normal endings, but with accent always remaining
irregularly upon the stem: thus, gávā, gáve, gávi, gávos, gávām; góbhyām, góbhis, góbhyas,
góṣu. In the Veda, another form of the gen. pl. is gónam; the nom. etc. du. is (as in all other
such cases) also gā́vā; and gā́m, gós, and gā́s are not infrequently to be pronounced as
dissyllables. As acc. pl. is found a few times gāvas.
d. The stem dyó f. (but in V. usually m.) sky, day is yet more anomalous, having beside it a
simpler stem dyu, which becomes div before a vowel-ending. The native grammarians treat the
two as

independent words, but it is more convenient to put them together. The stem dyó is inflected
precisely like gó, as above described. The complete declension is as follows (with forms not
actually met with in use bracketed):
Singular.
Dual.
Plural.
N.
dyāús
[dívāu]
dyā́vāu
dívas
dyā́vas
A.
dívam
dyā́m
divás, dyū́n
[dyā́s]
I.
divā́
[dyávā]
[dyúbhyām]
[dyóbhyām]
dyúbhis
[dyóbhis]
D.
divé
dyáve
[dyúbhyas]
[dyóbhyas]
Ab.
divás
dyós
G.
divás
dyós
[divós]
[dyávos]
[divā́m]
[dyávām]
L.
diví
dyávi
dyúṣu
[dyóṣu]
e. The dat. sing. dyáve is not found in the early language. Both dívas and divás occur as
accus. pl. in V. As nom. etc. du., dyā́vā is, as usual, the regular Vedic form: once occurs dyávī
(du.), as if a neuter form; and dyāús is found once used as ablative. The cases dyāus, dyām and
dyūn (once) are read in V. sometimes as dissyllables; and the first as accented vocative then
becomes dyāùs (i.e. díāus: see 314).
f. Adjective compounds having a diphthongal stem as final member are not numerous, and
tend to shorten the diphthong to a vowel. Thus, from nāu we have bhinnanu; from go, several
words like águ, saptágu, sugu, bor hugú (f. gū́ JB.); and, correspondingly, rāi seems to be
reduced to ri in bṛhádraye and ṛdhádrayas (RV.). In derivation, go maintains its full form in
gotra, agótā, -gava (f. -gavī), etc.; as first member of a compound, it is variously treated: thus,
gávāçir, gáviṣṭi (but gaāçir, gaīṣṭi K.), etc.; goaçvá or go‘çva, góṛjīka, góopaça, etc. In certain
compounds, also, dyu or dyo takes an anomalous form: thus, dyāurdā (K.), dyāurloká (ÇB.),
dyāúsaṁçita (AV.). In revánt (unless this is for rayivant) rāi becomes re. RV. has ádhrigāvas
from ádhrigu (of questionable import); and AV. has ghṛtastā́vas, apparently accus. pl. of
ghṛtastú or -stó.
B. Derivative stems in ā, ī, ū.
362. To this division belong all the ā and ī-stems which have not been specified above as
belonging to the other or root-word division; and also, in the later language, most of the ī and
ū-stems of the other division, by transfer to a more predominant mode of inflection. Thus:
1. a. The great mass of derivative feminine ā-stems, substantive and adjective.
b. The inflection of these stems has maintained itself with little change through the whole
history of the language, being almost precisely the same in the Vedas as later.

2. c. The great mass of derivative feminine ī-stems.
d. This class is without exception in the later language. In the earlier, it suffers the
exception pointed out above (355 b): that feminines made with change of accent follow this
mode of declension only when the accent is not on the ī́: thus, táviṣī, páruṣṇī, páliknī, róhiṇī.
e. The ī-stems of this division in general are regarded as made by contraction of an earlier
ending in yā. Their inflection has become in the later language somewhat mixed with that of
the other division, and so far different from the Vedic inflection: see below, 363 g.
f. Very few derivative stems in ī are recognized by the grammarians as declined like the
root-division; the Vedic words of that class are, if retained in use, transferred to this mode of
inflection.
g. A very small number of masculine ī-stems (half-a-dozen) are in the Veda declined as of
the derivative division: they are a few rare proper names, mā́talī etc.; and rā́ṣṭrī and sirī́ (only
one case each).
3. h. The ū-stems are few in number, and are transfers from the other division, assimilated
in inflection to the great class of derivative ī-stems (except that they retain the ending s of the
nom. sing.).
363. Endings. The points of distinction between this and the other division are as follows:
a. In nom. sing. the usually s-ending is wanting: except in the ū-stems and a very few ī-
stems — namely, lakṣmī, tarī, tantrī, tandrī — which have preserved the ending of the other
division.
b. The accus. sing. and pl. add simply m and s respectively.
c. The dat., abl.-gen., and loc. sing. take always the fuller endings āi, ās, ām; and these are
separated from the final of the ā-stems by an interposed y. In Brāhmaṇa etc., āi is generally
substituted for ās (307 h).
d. Before the endings ā of instr. sing. and os of gen.-loc. du., the final of ā-stems is treated
as if changed to e; but in the Veda, the instr. ending ā very often (in nearly half the
occurrences) blends with the final to ā. The yā of ī-stems is in a few Vedic examples contracted
to ī, and even to i. A loc. sing. in ī occurs a few times.
e. In all the weakest cases above mentioned, the accent of an ī- or ū-stem having acute final
is thrown forward upon the ending. In the remaining case of the same class, the gen. pl., a n is
always interposed between stems and ending, and the accent remains upon the former (in RV.,
however, it is usually thrown forward upon the ending, as in i and u-stems).
f. In voc. sing., final ā becomes e; final ī and ū are shortened.
g. In nom.-acc.-voc. du. and nom. pl. appears in ī (and ū)-stems a marked difference
between the earlier and later language, the latter borrowing the forms of the other division.
The du. ending āu is unknown in RV., and very rare in AV.; the Vedic ending is ī (a

corresponding dual of ū-stems does not occur). The regular later pl. ending as has only a

doubtful example or two in RV., and a very small number in AV.; the case there (and it is one
of very frequent occurrence) adds s simply; and though yas-forms occur in the Brāhmaṇas,
along with īs-forms, both are used rather indifferently as nom. and accus. (as, indeed, they
sometimes interchange also in the epics). Of ā-stems, the du. nom. etc. ends in e, both earlier
and later; in pl., of course, s-forms are indistinguishable from as-forms. The RV. has a few
examples of āsas for ās.
h. The remaining cases call for no remark.
364. Examples of declension. As models of the inflection of derivative stems ending in long
vowels, we may take सेना sénā f. army; का kanyā̀ f. girl; देवी devī́ f. goddess; वधू vadhū́ f.
woman.
Singular:
N.
सेना
sénā
का
kanyā̀
देवी
devī́
वधूस्
vadhū́s
A.
सेनाम्
sénām
काम्
kanyā̀m
देवीम्
devī́m
वधूम्
vadhū́m
I.
सेनया
sénayā
कया
kanyàyā
देा
devyā́
वा
vadhvā́
D.
सेनायै
sénāyāi
कायै
kanyā̀yāi
देै
devyāí
वै
vadhvāí
Ab. G.
सेनायास्
sénāyās
कायास्
kanyā̀yās
देास्
devyā́s
वास्
vadhvā́s
L.
सेनायाम्
sénāyām
कायाम्
kanyā̀yām
देाम्
devyā́m
वाम्
vadhvā́m
V.
सेने
séne
के
kánye
देिव
dévi
वधु
vádhuv
Dual:
N. A. V.
सेने
séne
के
kanyè
देौ
devyāú
वौ
vadhvāù
I. D. Ab.
सेनााम्
sénābhyām
कााम्
kanyā̀bhyām
देवीाम्
devī́bhyām
वधूाम्
vadhū́bhyām
G. L.
सेनयोस्
sénayos
कयोस्
kanyàyos
देोस्
devyós
वोस्
vadhvós

Plural:
N. V.
सेनास्
sénās
कास्
kanyā̀s
देास्
devyàs
वास्
vadhvàs
A.
सेनास्
sénās
कास्
kanyā̀s
देवीस्
devī́s
वधूस्
vadhū́s
I.
सेनािभस्
sénābhis
कािभस्
kanyā̀bhis
देवीिभस्
devī́bhis
वधूिभस्
vadhū́bhis
D. Ab.
सेनास्
sénābhyas
कास्
kanyā̀bhyas
देवीस्
devī́bhyas
वधूस्
vadhū́bhyas
G.
सेनानाम्
sénānām
कानाम्
kanyā̀nām
देवीनाम्
devī́nām
वधूनाम्
vadhū́nām
L.
सेनासु
sénāsu
कासु
kanyā̀su
देवीषु
devī́ṣu
वधूषु
vadhū́ṣu
a. In the Veda vadhū́ is a stem belonging to the other division (like tanū́, above, 356).
365. Examples of Vedic forms are:
a. ā-stems: instr. sing. manīṣā́ (this simpler form is especially common from stems in tā and
iā); nom. pl. vaçā́sas (about twenty examples); accus. pl. araṁgamā́sas (a case or two). Half the
bhyas-cases are to be read as bhias; the ām of gen. pl. is a few times to be resolved into aam;
and the ā and ām of nom. accus. sing. are, very rarely, to be treated in the same manner.
b. ī-stems: instr. sing. çámī, çámi; loc. gaurī́; nom. etc. du. devī́; nom. pl. devī́s; gen. pl.
bahvīnā́m. The final of the stem is to be read as a vowel (not y) frequently, but not in the
majority of instances: thus, deviā́, deviā́s, deviā́m, ródasios.
c. The sporadic instances of transfer between this division and the preceding have been
already sufficiently noticed.
d. Of the regular substitution made in the Brāhmaṇa language (307 g, 336 g, 363 c) of the
dat. sing. ending ai for the gen.-abl. ending ās, in all classes of words admitting the latter
ending, a few examples may be given here: abhibhūtyāi rūpam (AB.) a sign of overpowering;
triṣṭubhaç ca jagatyāi ca (AB.) of the metres triṣṭubh and jagati ; vāco dāivyāi ca mānuṣyāi ca
(AA.) of speech, both divine and human; striyāi payaḥ (AB.) woman's milk; dhenvāí vā́ etád
rétaḥ (TB.) that, forsooth, is the seed of the cow ; jīrṇāyāi tvacaḥ (KB.) of dead skin; jyāyasī
yājyāyāi (AB.) superior to the yājyā; asyāi divo ‘smād antarikṣāt (ÇÇS.) from this heaven, from
this atmosphere. The same substitution is made once in the AV.: thus, svápantv asyāi jñātáyaḥ
let her relatives sleep.

366. The noun strī́ f. woman (probably contracted from sūtrī́ generatrix), follows a mixed
declension: thus, strī́, stríyam or strī́m, striyā́, striyāí, striyā́s, striyā́m, strí; stríyāu, strībhyā́m,
striyós; stríyas, stríyas or strī́s, strībhís, strībhyás, strīṇā́m, strīṣú (but the accusatives strī́m and
strī́s are not found in the older language, and the voc. stri is not quotable). The accentuation is
that of a root-word; the forms (conspicuously the nom. sing.) are those of the other or
derivative division.
Adjectives.
367. a. The occurrence of original adjectives in long final vowels, and of compounds having
as final member a stem of the first division, has been sufficiently treated above, so far as
masculine and feminine forms are concerned. To form a neuter stem in composition, the rule of
the later language is that the final long vowel be shortened; and the stem so made is to be
inflected like an adjective in i or u (339, 341, 344).
b. Such neuter forms are very rare, and in the older language almost unknown. Of neuters
from ī-stems have been noted in the Veda only hariçríyam, acc. sing. (a masc. form), and
suādhías, gen. sing. (same as mac. and fem.); from ū-stems, only a few examples, and from
stem-forms which might be masc. and fem. also: thus, vibhú, subhú, etc. (nom.-acc. sing.:
compare 354); supúā and mayobhúvā, instr. sing.; and mayobhú, acc. pl. (compare purú: 342 k);
from ā-stems occur only half-a-dozen examples of a nom. sing. in ās, like the masc. and fem.
form.
c. Compounds having nouns of the second division as final member are common only from
derivatives in ā; and these shorten the final to a in both masculine and neuter: thus, from a
not and prajā progeny come the masc. and neut. stem apraja, fem. aprajā childless. Such
compounds with nouns in ī and ū are said to be inflected in masc. and fem. like the simple
words (only with īn and ūn in acc. pl. masc.); but the examples given by the grammarians are
fictitious.
d. Stems with shortened final are occasionally met with: thus, ekapatni, āttalakṣmi; and such
adverbs (neut. sing. accus.) as upabhāimi, abhyujjayini. The stem strī is directed to be
shortened to stri for all genders.
368. It is convenient to give a complete paradigm, for all genders, of an adjective stem in अ
a. We take for the purpose पाप pāpá evil, of which the feminine is usually made in आ ā in the
later language , but in ई ī in the older.

Singular:
m.
n.
f.
f.
N.
पापस्
pāpás
पापम्
pāpám
पापा
pāpā́
पापी
pāpī́
A.
पापम्
pāpám
पापम्
pāpā́m
पापीम्
pāpī́m
I.
पापेन
pāpéna
पापया
pāpáyā
पाा
pāpyā́
D.
पापाय
pāpā́ya
पापायै
pāpā́yāi
पाै
pāpyāí
Ab.
पापात्
pāpā́t
पापायास्
pāpā́yās
पाास्
pāpyā́s
G.
पाप
pāpásya
पापायास्
pāpā́yās
पाास्
pāpyā́s
L.
पापे
pāpé
पापायाम्
pāpā́yām
पााम्
pāpyā́m
V.
पाप
pā́pa
पापे
pā́pe
पािप
pā́pi
Dual:
N. A. V.
पापौ
pāpāú
पापे
pāpé
पापे
pāpé
पाौ
pāpyāù
I. D. Ab.
पापााम्
pāpā́bhyām
पापााम्
pāpā́bhyām
पापीाम्
pāpī́bhyām
G. L.
पापयोस्
pāpáyos
पापयोस्
pāpáyos
पाोस्
pāpyós
Plural:
N.
पापास्
pāpā́s
पापािन
pāpā́ni
पापास्
pāpā́s
पास्
pāpyàs
A.
पापान्
pāpā́n
पापािन
pāpā́ni
पापास्
pāpā́s
पापीस्
pāpī́s
I.
पापैस्
pāpāís
पापािभस्
pāpā́bhis
पापीिभस्
pāpī́bhis
D. Ab.
पापेस्
pāpébhyas
पापास्
pāpā́bhyas
पापीस्
pāpī́bhyas

G.
पापानाम्
pāpā́nām
पापानाम्
pāpā́nām
णाणीनाम्
pāpī́nām
L.
पापेषु
pāpéṣu
पापासु
pāpā́su
णाणीषु
pāpī́ṣu
Declension IV.
Stems in ऋ ṛ (or अ ar).
369. This declension is a comparatively limited one, being almost entirely composed of
derivative nouns formed with the suffix तृ tṛ (or त tar), which makes masculine nomina agentis
(used also participially), and a few nouns of relationship.
a. But it includes also a few nouns of relationship not made with that suffix: namely devṛ́
m., svásṛ and nánāndṛ f.; and besides these, nṛ́ m., stṛ́ (in V.) m., usṛ́ (in V.) f., savyaṣṭhṛ m.,
and the feminine numerals tisṛ and catasṛ (for which, see 482 e, g). The feminines in tṛ are
only mātṛ́, duhitṛ́, and yā́tṛ.
b. The inflection of these stems is quite closely analogous with that of stems in i and u
(second declension); its peculiarity, as compared with them, consists mainly in the treatment of
the stem itself, which has a double form, fuller in the strong cases, briefer in the weak ones.
370. Forms of the Stem. In the weak cases (excepting the loc. sing.) the stem-final is ṛ,
which in the weakest cases, or before a vowel-ending, is changed regularly to r (129). But as
regards the strong cases, the stems of this declension fall into two classes: in one of them —
which is very much the larger, containing all the nomina agentis, and also the nouns of
relationship náptṛ and svásṛ, and the irregular words stṛ́ and savyaṣṭhṛ — the ṛ is vriddhied, or
becomes ār; in the other, containing most of the nouns of relationship, with nṛ́ and usṛ́, the ṛ is
gunated, or changed to ar. In both classes, the loc. sing. has ar as stem-final.
371. Endings: These are in general the normal, but with the following exceptions:
a. The nom. sing. (masc. and fem.) ends always in ā (for original ars or ārs). The voc. sing.
ends in ar.
b. The accus. sing. adds am to the (strengthened) stem; the accus. pl. has (like i- and u-
stems) n as masc. ending and s as fem. ending, with the ṛ lengthened before them.

c. The abl.-gen. sing. changes ṛ to ur (or us: 169 b).
d. The gen. pl. (as in i and u-stems) inserts n before ām, and lengthens the stem-final
before it. But the ṛ of nṛ́ may also remain short.
e. The above are the rules of the later language. The older presents certain deviations from
them. Thus:
f. The ending in nom.-acc.-voc. du. is (as universally in the Veda) regularly ā instead of āu
(only ten āu-forms in RV.).
g. The i of loc. sing. is lengthened to ī in a few words: thus, kartárī.
h. In the gen. pl., the RV. has once svásrām, without inserted n; and narā́m instead of
nṛṇā́m is frequent.
i. Other irregularities of nṛ́ are the sing. dat. náre, gen. náras, and loc. nári. The Veda
writes always nṛṇā́m in gen. pl., but its ṛ is in a majority of cases metrically long.
j. The stem usṛ́ f. dawn has the voc. sing. uṣar, the gen. sing. usrás; and the accus. pl. also
usrás, and loc. sing. usrā́m (which is metrically trisyllable: usṛā́m), as if in analogy with ī and ū-
stems. Once occurs usrí in loc. sing., but it is to be read as if the regular trisyllable form, uṣúri
(for the exchange of s and ṣ, see 181 a).
k. From stṛ́ come only tā́ras (apparently) and stṛ́bhis.
l. In the gen.-loc. du., the r is almost always to be read as a separate syllable, ṛ, before the
ending os: thus, pitṛós, etc. On the contrary, nánāndari is once to be read nánāndri.
m. For neuter forms, see below, 375.
372. Accent. The accentuation follows closely the rules for i- and u-stems: if on the final of
the stem, it continues, as acute, on the corresponding syllable throughout, except in the gen.
pl., where it may be (and in the Veda always is) thrown forward upon the ending; where, in the
weakest cases, ṛ becomes r, the ending has the accent. The two monosyllabic stems, nṛ́ and stṛ́,
do not show the monosyllabic accent: thus (besides the forms already given above), nṛ́bhis,
nṛ́ṣu.
373. Examples of declension. As models of this mode of inflection, we may take from the
first case (with आ ār in the strong forms) the stems दातृ dātṛ́ m. giver and  svásṛ f. sister;
from the second class (with अ ar in the strong forms), the stem िपतृ pitṛ́ m. father.
Singular:
N.
दाता
dātā́
सा
svásā
िपता
pitā́
A.
दातारम्
dātā́ram
सारम्
svásāram
िपतरम्
pitáram

I.
दाा
dātrā́
ा
svásrā
िपा
pitrā́
D.
दाे
dātré
े
svásre
िपे
pitré
Ab. G.
दातु
dātúr
सु
svásur
िपतु
pitúr
L.
दातिर
dātári
सिर
svásari
िपतिर
pitári
V.
दात
dā́tar
स
svásar
िपत
pítar
Dual:
N. A. V.
दातारौ
dātā́rāu
सारौ
svásārāu
िपतरौ
pitárāu
I. D. Ab.
दातृाम्
dātṛ́bhyām
ाम्
svásṛbhyām
िपतृाम्
pitṛ́bhyām
G. L.
दाोस्
dātrós
ोस्
svásros
िपोस्
pitrós
Plural:
N. V.
दातारस्
dātā́ras
सारस्
svásāras
िपतरस्
pitáras
A.
दातॄन्
dātṝ́n
सॄस्
svásṝs
िपतॄन्
pitṝ́n
I.
दातृिभस्
dātṛ́bhis
िभस्
svásṛbhis
िपतृिभस्
pitṛ́bhis
D. Ab.
दातृस्
dātṛ́bhyas
स्
svásṛbhyas
िपतृस्
pitṛ́bhyas
G.
दातॄणाम्
dātṝṇā́m
सॄणाम्
svásṝṇām
िपतॄणाम्
pitṝṇā́m
L.
दातृषु
dātṛ́ṣu
षु
svásṛṣu
िपतृषु
pitṛ́ṣu
a. The feminine stem मातृ mātṛ́, mother, is inflected precisely like िपतृ pitṛ́, excepting that its
accusative plural is मातॄस् mātṝ́s.

b. The peculiar Vedic forms have been sufficiently instanced above; the only ones of other
than sporadic occurrence being the nom. etc. du. dātā́rā, svásārā, pitárā, and the gen. pl. of nṛ,
narā́m.
c. The nom. pl. forms pitaras and mātaras etc. are found used also as accus. in the epics.
374. The stem kroṣṭṛ́ 
m. jackal 
(lit'ly howler) substitutes in the middle cases the
corresponding forms of króṣṭu.
375. Neuter forms. The grammarians prescribe a complete neuter declension also for bases
in tṛ, precisely accordant with that of vā́ri or mádhu (above, 339, 341). Thus, for example:
Sing.
Du.
Plur.
N. A.
dhātṛ́
dhātṛ́ṇī
dhātṝ́́ṇi
I.
dhātṛ́ṇā
dhātṛ́bhyām
dhātṛ́bhis
G.
dhātṛ́ṇas
dhātṛ́ṇos
dhātṝṇā́m
V.
dhā́tṛ, dhā́tar
dhā́tṛṇī
dhā́tṝṇi
a. The weakest cases, however (as of i- and u-stems used adjectively: 344), are allowed also
to be formed like the corresponding masculine cases: thus, dhātrā́ etc.
b. No such neuter forms chance to occur in the Veda, but they begin to appear in the
Brāhmaṇas, under influence of the common tendency (compare Germ. Retter, Retterin; Fr.
menteur, menteuse) to give this nomen agentis a more adjective character, making it
correspond in gender with the noun which it (appositively) qualifies. Thus, we have in TB.
bhartṛ́ and janayitṛ́, qualifying antárikṣam; and bhartṝ́́ṇi and janayitṝ́́ṇi, qualifying nákṣatrāṇi; as,
in M., grahītṝṇi, qualifying indriyāṇi.
c. When a feminine noun is to be qualified in like manner, the usual feminine derivative in ī
is employed: thus, in TB., bhartryàs and bhartryāù, janayitryàs and janayitryāù, qualifying ā́pas
and ahorātré; and such instances are not uncommon.
d. The RV. shows the same tendency very curiously once in the accus. pl. mātṝ́́n, instead of
mātṝ́́s, in apposition with masculine nouns (RV. x. 35.2).
e. Other neuter forms in RV. are sthātúr gen. sing., dhmātárī loc. sing.; and for the nom.
sing., instead of -tṛ, a few more or less doubtful cases, sthātar, sthātúr, dhartári.
Adjectives.
376. a. There are no original adjectives of this declension: for the quasi-adjectival character
of the nouns composing it, see above (375 b). The feminine stem is made by the suffix ī: thus,
dātrī́, dhātrī.
b. Roots ending in ṛ (like those in i and u: 345) add a t to make a declinable stem, when
occurring as final member of a com-

pound: thus, armakṛ́t (√kṛ) , vajrabhṛ́t (√bhṛ) , balihṛ́t (√hṛ). From some ṛ-roots, also, are made
stems in ir and ur: see below, 383 a, b.
c. Nouns in ṛ as finals of adjective compounds are inflected in the same manner as when
simple, in the masculine and feminine; in the neuter, they would doubtless have the peculiar
neuter endings in nom.-acc.-voc. of all numbers.
d. But TS. has once tvátpitāras, nom. pl., having thee for father.
Declension V.
Stems ending in Consonants.
377. All stems ending in consonants may properly be classed together, as forming a single
comprehensive declension; since, though some of them exhibit peculiarities of inflection, these
have to do almost exclusively with the stem itself, and not with the declensional endings.
387. In this declension, masculines and feminines of the same final are inflected alike; and
neuters are peculiar (as usually in the other declensions) only in the nom.-acc.-voc. of all
numbers.
a. The majority of consonantal stems, however, are not inflected in the feminine, but form a
special feminine derivative stem in ई ī (never in आ ā), by adding that ending to the weak form
of the masculine.
b. Exceptions are in general the stems of divisions A and B — namely, the radical stems
etc., and those in as and is and us. For special cases, see below.
379. Variations, as between stronger and weaker forms, are very general among consonantal
stems: either of two degrees (strong and weak), or of three (strong, middle, and weakest): see
above, 311.
a. The peculiar neuter forms, according to the usual rule (311 b), are made in the plural
from the strong stem, in singular and dual from the weak — or, when the gradation is
threefold, in singular from the middle stem, in dual from the weakest.

b. As in the case of stems ending in short vowels ( āsyā̀ni, vā́rīṇi, mádhūni, dātṝ́ṇi, etc.), a
nasal sometimes appears in the special neuter plural cases which is found nowhere else in
inflection. Thus, from the stems in as, is, us, the nom.-acc.-voc. pl. in - āṅsi, -īṅṣi, -ūṅṣi are very
common at every period. According to the grammarians, the radical stems etc. (division A) are
treated in the same way; but examples of such neuters are of extreme rarity in the language;
no Vedic text offers one, and in the Brāhmaṇas and Sūtras have been noted only -hunti (AB. vii.
2. 3), -vṛnti (PB. xvi. 2. 7 et al.), - bhāñji (KB. xxvii. 7), -bhṛ́nti (ÇB. viii. 1. 31), and -yuñji (LÇS.
ii. 1. 8); while in the later language is found here and there a case, like -çrunti (Ragh.), -pūṅṣi
(Çiç.); it may be questioned whether they are not later analogical formations.
380. The endings are throughout those given above (310) as the "normal".
a. By the general law as to finals (150), the s of the nom. sing, masc. and fem. is always
lost; and irregularities of treatment of the final of the stem in this case are not infrequent.
b. The gen. and abl. sing. are never distinguished in form from one another — nor are, by
ending, the nom. and accus. pl.: but these sometimes differ in stem-form, or in accent, or in
both.
381. Change in the place of the accent is limited to monosyllabic stems and the participles
in ánt (accented on the final). For details, see below, under divisions A and E.
a. But a few of the compounds of the root añc or ac show an irregular shift of accent in the
oldest language: see below, 410.
382. a. For convenience and clearness of presentation, it will be well to separate from the
general mass of consonantal stems certain special classes which show kindred peculiarities of
inflection, and may be best described together.
Thus:
B. Derivative stems in as, is, us;
C. Derivative stems in an (an, man, van);
D. Derivative stems in in (in, min, vin);
E. Derivative stems in ant (ant, mant, vant);
F. Perfect active participles in vāṅs;
G. Comparatives in yāṅs or yas.
b. There remain, then, to constitute division A, especially radical stems, or those identical in
form with roots,

together with a comparatively small number of others which are inflected like these.
They will be taken up in the order thus indicated.
A. Root-stems, and those inflected like them.
383. The stems of this division may be classified as follows:
I. a. Root-stems, having in them no demonstrable element added to a root: thus, ṛ́c verse,
gír song, pád foot, díç, direction, máh (V.) great.
b. Such stems, however, are not always precisely identical in form with the root: thus, vā́c
from √vac, sráj from √sṛj, mū́ṣ from √muṣ, vríç from √vraçc (?), úṣ from √vas shine; — from
roots in final ṛ come stems in ir and ur: thus, gír, ā-çír, stír; júr, túr, dhúr, púr, múr, stúr,
sphúr; and psúr from √psar.
c. With these may be ranked the stems with reduplicated root, as cikít, yavīyúdh, vánīvan,
sasyád.
d. Words of this division in uncompounded use are tolerably frequent in the older language:
thus, in RV. are found more than a hundred of them; in AV., about sixty; but in the classical
Sanskrit the power of using any root at will in this way is lost, and the examples are
comparatively few. In all periods, however, the adjective use as final of a compound is very
common (see below, 401).
e. As to the infinitive use of various cases of the root-noun, see 971.
II. f. Stems made by the addition of t to a final short vowel of a root.
g. No proper root-stem ends in a short vowel, although there are (354) examples of transfer
of such to short-vowel-declensions; but i or u or ṛ adds a t to make a declinable form: thus, -jít,
-çrút, -kṛ́t. Roots in ṛ, however, as has just been seen (b), also make stems in ir or ur.
h. As regards the frequency and use of these words, the same is true as was stated above
respecting root-stems. The Veda offers examples of nearly thirty such formations, a few of them
(mít, rít, stút, hrút, vṛ́t, and dyút if this is taken from dyu) in independent use. Of roots in ṛ, t
is added by kṛ, dhṛ, dhvṛ, bhṛ, vṛ, sṛ, spṛ, hṛ, and hvṛ. The roots gā (or gam) and han also
make -gát and -hát by addition of the t to an abbreviated form in a (thus, adhvagát, dyugát,
dvigat, navagát, and saṁhát).
III. i. Monosyllabic (also a few apparently reduplicated) stems not certainly connectible with
any verbal root in the language, but having the aspect of root-stems, as containing no traceable
suffix:

thus, tvác skin, páth road, hṛ́d heart, áp and vā́r water, dvā́r door, ā́s mouth, kakúbh and
kakúd, summit.
j. Thirty or forty such words are found in the older language, and some of them continue in
later use, while others have been transferred to other modes of declension or have become
extinct.
k. Stems more or less clearly derivative, but made with suffixes of rare or even isolated
occurrence. Thus:
1. derivatives (V.) from prepositions with the suffix vat: arvāvát, āvát, udvát, nivát, parāvát,
pravát, saṁvát; — 2. derivatives (V.) in tāt (perhaps abbreviated from tāti), in a few isolated
forms: thus, uparátāt, devátāt, vṛkátāt, satyátāt, sarvátāt; — 3. other derivatives in t preceded
by various vowels: thus, daçát, vehát, vahát, sravát, saçcát, vāghát; nápāt; taḍít, divít, yoṣít,
rohít, sarít, harít; marút; yákṛt, çákṛt; and the numerals for 30, 40, 50, triṅçát etc. (475); — 4.
stems in ad: thus, dṛṣád, dhṛṣád, bhasád, vanád, çarád, samád; — 5. stems in j preceded by
various vowels: thus, tṛṣṇáj, dhṛṣáj, sanáj, bhiṣáj; uçíj, vaṇíj, bhuríj, niṇíj (?); ásṛj; — 6. a few
stems ending in a sibilant apparently formative: thus, jñā́s, -dās, bhā́s, mā́s, bhī́ṣ; — 7. a
remnant of unclassifiable cases, such as viṣṭáp, vípāç, kápṛth, çurúdh, iṣídh, pṛkṣúdh, raghát (?),
sarágh, visrúh, uṣṇíh, kaváṣ.
384. Gender. The root-stems are regularly feminine as nomen actionis, and masculine as
nomen agentis (which is probably only a substantive use of their adjective value: below, 400).
But the feminine noun, without changing its gender, is often also used concretely: e.g., druh
(√druh be inimical) means harming, enmity, and also harmer, hater, enemy — thus bordering
on the masculine value. And some of the feminines have a completely concrete meaning.
Through the whole division, the masculines are much less numerous than the feminines, and
the neuters rarest of all.
a. The independent neuter stems are hṛ́d (also -hārd), dám, vā́r, svàr, mā́s flesh, ā́s mouth,
bhā́s, dós (with which may be mentioned the indeclinables çā́m and yós); also the apparent
derivatives yákṛt, çákṛt, kápṛth, ásṛj.
385. Strong and weak stem-forms. The distinction of these two classes of forms is usually
made either by the presence or absence of a nasal, or by a difference in the quantity of the
stem-vowel, as long or short; less often, by other methods.
386. A nasal appears in the strong cases of the following words:
1. Compounds having as final member the root ac or añc: see below. 407 ff.; and RV. has
once uruvyáñcam from root vyac; — 2. The

stem yuj, sometimes, in the older language: thus, nom. sing. yúñ (for yúñk), accus. yúñjam, du.
yúñjā (but also yújam and yújā); — 3. The stem - dṛç, as final of a compound in the older
language; but only in the nom. sing, masc., and not always: thus, anyādṛ́n̄, īdṛ́n̄ , kīdṛ́n̄, tādṛ́n̄,
etādṛn, sadṛ́n̄ and pratisadṛ́n̄: but also īdṛ́k, tādṛ́k, svardṛ́k, etc.; — 4. For path and puṁs, which
substitute more extended stems, and for dant, see below, 394–6.
387. The vowel a is lengthened in strong cases as follows:
1. Of the roots vac, sac, sap, nabt, ças, in a few instances (V.), at the end of compounds; —
2. Of the roots vah and sah, but irregularly; see below, 403–5; — 3. Of ap water (see 393);
also in its compound rītyàp; — 4. Of pad, foot: in the compounds of this word, in the later
language, the same lengthening is made in the middle cases also; and in RV. and AV. the nom.
sing. neut. is both -pat and -pāt, while RV. has once -pāde, and -pādhbis and -pātsu occur in
the Brāhmaṇas; — 5. Of nas nose (? nā́sā nom. du. fem. RV., once); — 6. Sporadic cases (V.)
are: yāj (?), voc. sing.; pāthás and -rāpas, accus. pl.; vánīvānas, nom. pl. The strengthened
forms bhāj and rāj are constant, through all classes of cases.
388. Other modes of differentiation, by elision of a or contraction of the syllable containing
it, appear in a few stems:
1. In -han: see below, 402; — 2. In kṣam (V.), along with prolongation of a: thus, kṣā́mā du.,
kṣā́mās pl.; kṣamā́ instr. sing., kṣámi loc. sing., kṣmás abl. sing.; — 3. In dvā́r, contracted (V.)
t o dur in weak cases (but with some confusion of the two classes); — 4. In svàr, which
becomes, in RV., sūr in weak cases; later it is indeclinable.
389. The endings are as stated above (380).
a. Respecting their combination with the final of the stem, as well as the treatment of the
latter when it occurs at the end of the word, the rules of euphonic combination (chap. III.) are
to be consulted; they require much more constant and various application here than anywhere
else in declension.
b. Attention may be called to a few exceptional cases of combination (V.): mādbhís and
mādbhyás from mā́s month; the wholly anomalous paḍbhís (RV. and VS.: AV. has always
padbhís) from pád; and saráṭ and saráḍbhyas corresponding to a nom. pl. sarághas (instead of
saráhas: 222). Dán is apparently for dám, by 143 a.
c. According to the grammarians, neuter stems, unless they end in a nasal or a semivowel,
take in nom.-acc.-voc. pl. a strengthening nasal before the final consonant. But no such cases
from neuter noun-stems appear ever to have been met with in use; and as regards adjective
stems ending in a root, see above, 379 b.

390. Monosyllabic stems have the regular accent of such, throwing the tone forward upon
the endings in the weak cases.
a. But the accusative plural has its normal accentuation as a weak case, upon the ending, in
only a minority (hardly more than a third) of the stems: namely in datás, pathás, padás, nidás,
apás, uṣás, jñāsás, puṁsás, māsás, mahás; and sometimes in vācás, srucás, hrutás, sridhás,
kṣapás, vipás, durás, iṣás, dviṣás, druhás (beside vā́cas etc.).
b. Exceptional instances, in which a weak case has the tone on the stem, occur as follows:
sádā, nádbhyas, tánā (also tanā́) and táne, bā́dhe (infln.), ráṇe and ráṅsu, váṅsu, sváni, vípas,
kṣámi, sū́rā and sū́ras (but sūré), áṅhas, and vánas and bṛ́has (in vánaspáti, bṛ́haspáti). On the
other hand, a strong case is accented on the ending in mahás, nom. pl., and kāsám (AV.:
perhaps a false reading). And preṣā́, instr. sing., is accented as if préṣ were a simple stem,
instead of pra-íṣ. Vimṛdháḥ is of doubtful character. For the sometimes anomalous accentuation
of stems in ac or añc, see 410.
391. Examples of inflection. As an example of normal monosyllabic inflection, we may take
the stem वाच् vā́c f. voice (from √वच् vac, with constant prolongation); of inflection with strong
and weak stem, प pád m. foot; of polysyllabic inflection, मत् marút, m. wind or wind-god; of a
monosyllabic root-stem in composition, िवृत् trivṛ́t, three-fold, in the neuter. Thus:
Singular:
N. V.
वाक
vā́k
पात्
pā́t
मत्
marút
िवृत्
trivṛ́t
A.
वाचम्
vā́cam
पादम्
pā́dam
मतम्
marútam
िवृत्
trivṛ́t
I.
वाचा
vācā́
पदा
padā́
मता
marútā
िवृता
trivṛ́tā
D.
वाचे
vācé
पदे
padé
मते
marúte
िवृते
trivṛ́te
Ab. G.
वाचस्
vācás
पदस्
padás
मतस्
marútas
िवृतस्
trivṛ́tas
L.
वािच
vācí
पिद
padí
मित
marúti
िवृित
trivṛ́ti

Dual:
N. A. V.
वाचौ
vā́cāu
पादौ
pā́dāu
मतौ
marútāu
िवृती
trivṛ́tī
I. D. Ab.
वााम्
vāgbhyā́m
पाम्
padbhyā́m
माम्
marudbhyām
िवृाम्
trivṛ́dbhyām
G. L.
वाचोस्
vācós
पदोस्
padós
मतोस्
marútos
िवृतोस्
trivṛ́tos
Plural:
N. V.
वाचस्
vā́cas
पादस्
pā́das
मतस्
marútas
िवृि
trivṛ́nti
A.
वाचस्
vācás, vā́cas
पदस्
pádas
मतस्
marútas
िवृि
trivṛ́nti
I.
वािभस्
vāgbhís
पिस्
padbhís
मिस्
marúdbhis
िवृिस्
trivṛ́dbhis
D. Ab.
वास्
vāgbhyás
पस्
padbhyás
मस्
marúdbhyas
िवृस्
trivṛ́dbhyas
G.
वाचाम्
vācā́m
पदाम्
padā́m
मताम्
marútām
िवृताम्
trivṛ́tām
L.
वाु
vākṣú
पु
patsú
मु
marútsu
वृु
trivṛ́tsu
By way of illustration of the leading methods of treatment of a stem-final, at the end of the
word and in combination with case-endings, characteristic case-forms of a few more stems are
here added. Thus:
a. Stems in j: yuj-class (219 a, 142), bhiṣáj physician: bhiṣák, bhiṣájam, bhiṣágbhis, bhiṣákṣu;
— mṛj-class (219 b, 142), samrā́j universal ruler: samrā́ṭ, samrā́jam, samrā́ḍbhis, samrā́ṭsu.
b. Stems in dh: -vṛ́dh increasing: -vṛ́t, -vṛ́dham, -vṛ́dbhis, -vṛ́tsu; -búdh (155) waking: -bhút,
-búdham, -bhúdbhis, -bhútsu.
c. Stems ending in bh: -stúbh prasing: -stúp, -stúbham, -stúbbhis, -stúpsu.
d. Stems in ç: díç (218 a, 145) direction: dík, díçam, digbhís, dikṣú; — víç (218, 145) the
people: víṭ, víçam, viḍbhís, viṭsú (V. vikṣú: 218 a).
e. Stems in ṣ (226 b, 145): dvíṣ enemy: dvíṭ, dvíṣam, dviḍbhís, dviṭsú.
f. Stems in h: duh-class (232-3 a, 155 b, 147), dúh milki

yielding: -dhúk, -dúham, -dhúgbhis, -dhúkṣu; — ruh-class (223 b, 147), -lih licking: -liṭ, -liham,
-liḍbhis, -liṭsu.
g. Stems in m (143 a, 212 a: only praçā́n, nom. sing., quotable): -çām quieting: -çā́n,
-çā́mam, -çā́nbhis, -çā́nsu.
392. The root-stems in ir and ur (383 b) lengthen their vowel when the final r is followed
by another consonant (245 b), and also in the nom. sing. (where the case-ending s is lost).
a. Thus, from gír f. song come gī́r (gī́ḥ) , gíram, girā́, etc.; gírāu, gīrbhyā́m, girós; gíras,
gīrbhís, gīrbhyás, girā́m, gīrṣú (165); and, in like manner, from púr f. stronghold come pū́r
(pū́ḥ), púram, purā́, etc.; púrāu, pūrbhyā́m, purós; púras, pūrbhís, pūrbhyás, purā́m, pūrṣú.
b. There are no roots in is (except the excessively rare pis) or in us; but from the root çās
with its ā weakened to i (250) comes the noun āçís f. blessing, which is inflected like gír: thus,
āçī́s (āçī́ḥ) , āçíṣam, āçíṣā, etc.; āçíṣāu, āçī́rbhyām, āçíṣos; āçíṣas, āçī́rbhis, āçī́rbhyas, āçíṣām,
āçī́ḥṣu. And sajū́s together is apparently a stereotyped nominative of like formation from the
root juṣ. The form aṣṭā́prūṭ (TS.), from the root-stem pruṣ, is isolated and anomalous.
c. These stems in ir, ur, is show a like prolongation of vowel also in composition and
derivation: thus, gīrvāṇa, pūrbhíd, dhūrgata, dhūstva, āçīrdā́, āçī́rvant, etc. (but also gírvan,
gírvaṇas).
d. The native grammar sets up a class of quasi-radical stems like jigamis desiring to go,
made from the desiderative conjugation-stem (1027), and prescribes for it a declension like that
of āçís: thus, jigamīs, jigamiṣā, jigamīrbhis, jigamīḥṣu, etc. Such a class appears to be a mere
figment of the grammarians, since no example of it has been found quotable from the literature,
either earlier or later, and since there is, in fact, no more a desiderative stem jigamis than a
causative stem gamay.
393. The stem áp f. water is inflected only in the plural, and with dissimilation of its final
before bh to d (151 e): thus, ā́pas, apás, adbhís, adhbyás, apā́m, apsú.
a. But RV. has the sing. instr. apā́ and gen. apás. In the earlier language (especially AV.),
and even in the epics, the nom. and accus. pl. forms are occasionally confused in use, ā́pas
being employed as accus., and apás as nominative.
b. Besides the stem ap, case-forms of this word are sometimes used in composition and
derivation: thus, for example, abjā́, āpodevata, āpomáya, apsumant.
394. The stem púṁs m. man is very irregular, substituting púmāṅs in the strong cases, and
losing its s (necessarily) before initial bh of a case-ending, and likewise (by analogy with this,
or by an abbreviation akin with that noticed at 231) in the loc. plural. The vocative is (in
accordance with that of the somewhat similarly

inflected perfect participles: see 462 a) púman in the later language, but púmas in the earlier.
Thus: púmān, púmāṅsam, puṁsā́, puṁsé, puṁsás, puṁsí, púman; púmāṅsāu, pumbhyā́m,
puṁsós; púmāṅsas, puṁsás, pumbhís, pumbhyás, puṁsā́m, puṁsú.
a. The accentuation of the weak forms, it will be noticed, is that of a true monosyllabic
stem. The forms with bh-endings nowhere occur in the older language, nor do they appear to
have been cited from the later. Instances of the confusion of strong and weak forms are
occasionally met with. As to the retention of s unlingualized in the weakest cases (whence
necessarily follows that in the loc. pl.), see 183 a.
b. This stem appears under a considerable variety of forms in composition and derivation:
thus, as puṁs in puṁçcalī́, puṁstva, púṁsvant, -puṁska, etc; as pum in púṁvatsa, púṁrūpa,
puṁvat, pumartha, etc.; as puṁsa in puṁsavant; — at the end of a compound, either with its
full inflection, as in strīpúṁs etc.; or as puṁsa, in strīpuṁsa, mahāpuṁsa; or as puma in
strīpuma (TS. TA.).
395. The stem path m. road is defective in declension, forming only the weakest cases,
while the strong are made from pánthā or pánthan, and the middle from pathí: see under an-
stems, below, 433.
396. The stem dánt m. tooth is perhaps of participial origin, and has, like a participle, the
forms dánt and dát, strong and weak: thus (V.), dán, dántam, datā́, etc.; datás acc. pl. etc. But
in the middle cases it has the monosyllabic and not the participial accent: thus, dadbhís,
dadbhyás. In nom. pl. occurs also - datas instead of -dantas. By the grammarians, the strong
cases of this word are required to be made from dánta.
397. A number of other words of this division are defective, making part of their inflection
from stems of a different form.
a. Thus, hṛ́d n. heart, mā́ṅs or mā́s n. meat, mā́s m. month, nás f. nose, niç f. night (not
found in the older language), pṛ́t f. army, are said by the grammarians to lack the nom. of all
numbers and the accus. sing. and du. (the neuters, of course, the acc. pl. also), making them
respectively from hṛ́daya, māṅsá, mā́sa, nā́sikā, niçā, pṛ́tanā. But the usage in the older
language is not entirely in accordance with this requirement: thus, we find mā́s flesh accus.
sing.; mā́s month nom. sing.; and nā́sā nostrils du. From pṛ́t occurs only the loc. pl. pṛtsú and
(RV., once) the same case with double ending, pṛtsúṣu.
398. On the other hand, certain stems of this division, allowed by the grammarians a full
inflection, are used to fill up the deficiencies of those of another form.
a. Thus, ásṛj n. blood, çákṛt n. ordure, yákṛt n. liver, dós n. (also m.) fore-arm, have beside
them defective stems in án: see below, 432. Of none of them, however, is anything but the
nom.-acc. sing. found in the older language, and other cases later are but very scantily
represented.

b. Of ā́s n. mouth, and úd water, only a case or two are found, in the older language,
beside āsán and āsyà, and udán and údaka (432).
399. Some of the alternative stems mentioned above are instances of transition from the
consonant to a vowel declension: thus, dánta, mā́sa. A number of other similar cases occur,
sporadically in the older language, more commonly in the later. Such are pā́da, -māda, -dāça,
bhrājá, viṣṭápa, dvāra and dura, pura, dhura, -dṛça, nā́sā, nidā, kṣípā, kṣapā́, āçā́, and perhaps a
few others.
a. A few irregular stems will find a more proper place under the head of Adjectives.
Adjectives.
400. Original adjectives having the root-form are comparatively rare even in the oldest
language.
a. About a dozen are quotable from the RV., for the most part only in a few scattering
cases. But mah, great, is common in RV., though it dies out rapidly later. It makes a derivative
feminine stem, mahī́, which continues in use, as meaning earth etc.
401. But compound adjectives, having a root as final member, with the value of a present
participle, are abundant in every period of the language.
a. Possessive adjective compounds, also, of the same form, are not very rare: examples are
yatásruc with offered bowl; sū́ryatvac sun-skinned; cátuṣpad four-footed; suhā́rd kind-hearted,
friendly; rītyàp (i.e. rītí-ap) having streaming waters; sahásradvār furnished with a thousand
doors.
b. The inflection of such compounds is like that of the simple root-stems, masculine and
feminine being throughout the same, and the neuter varying only in the nom.-acc.-voc. of all
numbers. But special neuter forms are of rare occurrence, and masc.-fem. are sometimes used
instead.
c. Only rarely is a derivative feminine stem in ī formed: in the older language, only from the
compounds with ac or añc (407 ff.), those with han (402), those with pad, as ékapadī, dvipádī,
and with dant, as vṛ́ṣadatī, and mahī, ámucī (AV.), úpasadī (? ÇB).
Irregularities of inflection appear in the following:
402. The root han slay, as final of a compound, is inflected somewhat like a derivative noun
in an (below, 420 ff.), becoming hā in the nom. sing., and losing its n in the middle cases and
its a in the weakest cases (but only optionally in the loc. sing.). Further, when the vowel is lost,
h in contact with following n reverts to its original gh. Thus:

Singular.
Dual.
Plural.
N.
vṛtrahā́
vṛtraháṇāu
vṛtraháṇas
A.
vṛtraháṇam
vṛtraghnás
I.
vṛtraghnā́
vṛtrahábhyām
vṛtrahábhis
D.
vṛtraghné
vṛtrahábhyas
Ab.
vṛtraghnás
G.
vṛtraghnós
vṛtraghnā́m
L.
vṛtraghní, -háṇi
vṛtrahásu
V.
vṛ́trahan
vṛ́trahaṇāu
vṛ́trahaṇas
a. As to the change of n to ṇ, see 193, 195.
b. A feminine is made by adding ī to, as usual, the stem-form shown in the weakest cases:
thus, vṛtraghnī́.
c. An accus. pl. -hánas (like the nom.) also occurs. Vṛtrahábhis (RV., once) is the only
middle case-form quotable from the older language. Transitions to the a-declension begin
already in the Veda: thus, to -há (RV. AV.), -ghná (RV.), -hana.
403. The root vah carry at the end of a compound is said by the grammarians to be
lengthened to vāh in both the strong and middle cases, and contracted in the weakest cases to
ūh. which with a preceding a-vowel becomes āu (137 c): thus, from havyaváh sacrifice-bearing
(epithet 
of 
Agni), havyavā́ṭ, havyavā́ham, havyāúhā, 
etc.; havyavā́hāu, havyavā́ḍbhyām,
havyāúhos; havyavā́has, havyāúhas, havyavā́ḍbhis, etc. And çvetaváh (not quotable) is said to be
further irregular in making the nom. sing. in vās and the vocative in vas or vās.
a. In the earlier language, only strong forms of compounds with vah have been found to
occur: namely, -vā́ṭ, -vā́ham, -vā́hāu or -vā́hā, and -vā́has. But feminines in ī, from the weakest
stem — as turyāuhī́, dityāuhī́, paṣṭhāuhī́ — are met with in the Brāhmaṇas. TS. has the irregular
nom. sing. paṣṭhavā́t.
404. Of very irregular formation and inflection is one common compound of vah, namely
anaḍváh (anas+vah, burden-bearing or cart-drawing, i.e. ox). Its stem-form in the strong cases
is anaḍvā́h, in the weakest anaḍúh, and in the middle anaḍúd (perhaps by dissimilation from
anaḍúḍ). Moreover, its nom. and voc. sing, are made in vān and van (as if from a vant-stem).
Thus:
Singular.
Dual.
Plural.
N.
anaḍvā́n
anaḍvā́hāu
anaḍvā́has
A.
anaḍvā́ham
anaḍúhas
I.
anaḍúhā
anaḍúdbhyām
anaḍúdbhis
D.
anaḍúhe
anaḍúdbhyas
Ab.
anaḍúhas
G.
anaḍúhos
anaḍúhām
L.
anaḍúhi
anaḍútsu
V.
ánaḍvan
ánaḍvāhāu
ánaḍvāhas


a. Anaḍúdbhyas (AV., once) is the only middle case-form quotable from the older language. But
compounds showing the middle stem — as anaḍucchata, anaḍudarha — are met with in
Brāhmaṇas etc.
b. The corresponding feminine stem (of very infrequent occurrence) is either anaḍuhī́ (ÇB.)
or anaḍvāhī́ (K. MS.).
405. The root sah overcome has in the Veda a double irregularity: its s is changeable to ṣ
even after an a-vowel — as also in its single occurrence as an independent adjective (RV., tváṁ
ṣā́ṭ) — while it sometimes remains unchanged after an i or u-vowel; and its a is either
prolonged or remains unchanged, in both strong and weak cases. The quotable forms are: -ṣā́ṭ,
-ṣā́ham or -sā́ham or -sáham, -sáhā, -sā́he or -sáhe, -ṣā́has or -ṣáhas or -sáhas; -sáhā (du.);
-ṣā́has or -sáhas.
406. The compound avayā́j (√yaj make offering) a certain priest or (BR.) a certain sacrifice
is said to form the nom. and voc. sing avayā́s, and to make its middle cases from avayás.
a. Its only quotable form is avayā́s f. (RV. and AV., each once). If the stem is a derivative
from ava+√yaj conciliate, avayā́s is probably from ava + √yā, which has the same meaning. But
sadhamā́s (RV., once) and purodā́s (RV., twice) show a similar apparent substitution in nom.
sing. of the case-ending s after long ā for a final root-consonant (d and ç respectively).
Compare also the alleged çvetavās (above, 403).
407. Compounds with añc or ac. The root ac or añc makes, in combination with prepositions
and other words, a considerable class of familiarly used adjectives, of quite irregular formation
and inflection, in some of which it almost loses its character of root, and becomes an ending of
derivation.
a. A part of these adjectives have only two stem-forms: a strong in añc (yielding an̄, from
an̄ks, in nom. sing. masc.), and a weak in ac; others distinguish from the middle in ac a
weakest stem in c, before which the a is contracted with a preceding i or u into ī or ū.
b. The feminine is made by adding ī to the stem-form used in the weakest cases, and is
accented like them.
408. As examples of inflection we may take prā́ñc forward, east, pratyáñc opposite, west,
víṣvañc going apart.
Singular:
N. V.
prā́n̄ prā́k
pratyán̄ pratyák
víṣvan̄ víṣvak
A.
prā́ñcam prā́k
pratyáñcam pratyák
víṣvañcam víṣvak
I.
prā́cā
pratīcā́
víṣūcā
D.
prā́ce
pratīcé
víṣūce
Ab. G.
prā́cas
pratīcás
víṣūcas
L.
prā́ci
pratīcí
víṣūci
Dual:
N. A. V.
prā́ñcāu prā́cī
pratyáñcāu pratīcī́
víṣvañcāu víṣūcī
I. D. Ab.
prā́gbhyām
pratyágbhyām
víṣvagbhyām

G. L.
prā́cos
pratīcós
víṣūcos

Plural
N. V.
prā́ñcas prā́ñci
pratyáñcas pratyáñci
víṣvañcas víṣvañci
A.
prā́cas prā́ñci
pratīcás pratyáñci
víṣūcas víṣvañci
I.
prā́gbhis
pratyágbhis
víṣvagbhis
D. Ab.
prā́gbhyas
pratyágbhyas
víṣvagbhyas
G.
prā́cām
pratīcā́m
víṣūcām
L.
prā́kṣu
pratyákṣu
víṣvakṣu
a. The feminine stems are prā́cī, practīcī́, víṣūcī, respectively.
b. No example of the middle forms excepting the nom. etc. sing. neut. (and this generally
used as adverb) is found either in RV. or AV. In the same texts is lacking the nom. etc. pl.
neut. in ñci; but of this a number of examples occur in the Brāhmaṇas: thus, prā́ñci, pratyáñci,
arvāñci, samyáñci, sadhryañci, anvañci.
409. a. Like prā́ñc are inflected ápāñc, ávāñc, párāñc, arvā́ñc, adharā́ñc, and others of rare
occurrence.
b. Like pratyáñc are inflected nyàñc (i.e. níañc) , samyáñc (sam+añc, with irregularly
inserted i), and údañc (weakest stem údīc: ud+añc, with i inserted in weakest cases only), with
a few other rare stems.
c. Like víṣvañc is inflected anváñc, also three or four others of which only isolated forms
occur.
d. Still more irregular is tiryáñc, of which the weakest stem is tiráçc (tirás+ac: the other
stems are made from tir+añc or ac, with the inserted i).
410. The accentuation of these words is irregular, as regards both the stems themselves
and their inflected forms. Sometimes the one element has the tone and sometimes the other,
without any apparent reason for the difference. If the compound is accented on the final
syllable, the accent is shifted in RV. to the ending in the weakest cases provided their stem
shows the contraction to ī or ū: thus, prā́cā, arvā́cā, adharā́cas, but pratīcā́, anūcás, samīcī́. But
AV. and later texts usually keep the accent upon the stem: thus, pratī́cī, samī́cī, antū́cī (RV. has
pratī́cīm once). The change of accent to the endings, and even in polysyllabic stems, is against
all usual analogy.
B. Derivative stems in as, is, us.
411. The stems of this division are prevailingly neuter; but there are also a few masculines,
and one or two feminines.
412. The stems in अस् as are quite numerous, and mostly made with the suffix अस् as (a
small number also

with तस् tas and नस् nas, and some are obscure); the others are few, and almost all made with
the suffixes इस् is and उस् us.
413. Their inflection is almost entirely regular. But masculine and feminine stems in अस् as
lengthen the vowel of the ending in nom. sing.; and the nom.-acc.-voc. pl. neut. make the same
prolongation (of अ a or इ i or उ u) before the inserted nasal ( anusvāra).
414. Examples of declension. As examples we may take मनस् mánas n. mind; अिरस् án̄giras
m. Angiras; हिवस् havís n. oblation.
Singular:
N.
मनस्
mánas
अिरास्
án̄girās
हिवस्
havís
A.
मनस्
mánas
अिरसम्
án̄girasam
हिवस्
havís
I.
मनसा
mánasā
अिरसा
án̄girasā
हिवषा
havíṣā
D.
मनसे
mánase
अिरसे
án̄girase
हिवषे
havíṣe
Ab. G.
मनसस्
mánasas
अिरसस्
án̄girasas
हिवषस्
havíṣas
L.
मनिस
mánasi
अिरिस
án̄girasi
हिविष
havíṣi
V.
मनस्
mánas
अिरस्
án̄giras
हिवस्
havís
Dual:
N. A. V.
मनसी
mánasī
अिरसौ
án̄girasāu
हिवषी
havíṣī
I. D. Ab.
मनोाम्
mánobhyām
अिरोाम्
án̄girobhyām
हिवाम्
havírbhyām
G. L.
मनसोस्
mánasos
अिरसोस्
án̄girasos
हिवषोस्
havíṣos

Plural:
N. A. V.
मनांिस
mánāṅsi
अिरसस्
án̄girasas
हविष
havī́ṅṣi
I.
मनोिभस्
mánobhis
अिरोिभस्
án̄girobhis
हिवभस्
havírbhis
D. Ab.
मनोस्
mánobhyas
अिरोस्
án̄girobhyas
हिवस्
havírbhyas
G.
मनसाम्
mánasām
अिरसाम्
án̄girasām
हिवषाम्
havíṣām
L.
मनःसु
mánaḥsu
अिरःसु
án̄giraḥsu
हवीःषु
havī́ḥṣu
In like manner, चुस् cákṣus n. eye forms चुषा cákṣuṣā, चुाम् cákṣurbhyām, चूंिष cakṣūṅṣui,
and so on.
415. Vedic etc. Irregularities, a. In the older language, the endings - asam (acc. sing.) and
-asas (generally nom.-acc. pl.; once or twice gen.-abl. sing.) of stems in as are not infrequently
contracted to -ām, -ās — e. g. āçā́m, vedhā́m; surā́dhās, ánāgās — and out of such forms grow,
both earlier and later, substitute-stems in ā, as āçā́, jarā́, medhā́. So from other forms grow
stems in a and in asa, which exchange more or less with those in as through the whole history
of the language.
b. More scattering irregularities may be mentioned, as follows: 1. The usual masc. and fem.
du. ending in ā instead of āu; — 2. uṣás f. dawn often prolongs its a in the other strong cases,
as in the nom. sing.: thus, uṣā́sam, uṣā́sā, uṣā́sas (and once in a weak case, uṣā́sas); and in its
instr. pl. occurs once (RV.) uṣádbhis instead of uṣóbhis; — 3. from toçás is once (RV.) found a
similar dual, toçā́sā; — 4. from svávas and svátavas occur in RV. a nom. sing. masc. in vān, as
if from a stem in vant; and in the Brāhmaṇas is found the dat.-abl. pl. of like formation
svátavadbhyas.
c. The stems in is and us also show transitions to stems in i and u, and in iṣa and uṣa.
From janús is once (RV.) made the nom. sing, janū́s, after the manner of an as-stem (cf. also
janūrvā́sas ÇB.).
416. The grammarians regard uçánas m. as regular stem-form of the proper name noticed
above (355 a), but give it the irregular nom. uçánā and the voc. uçanas or uçana or uçanan.
Forms from the as-stem, even nom., are sometimes met with in the later literature.
a. As to forms from as-stems to áhan or áhar and ū́dhan or ū́dhar, see below, 430.

Adjectives
417. a. A few neuter nouns in as with accent on the radical syllable have corresponding
adjectives or appellatives in ás, with accent on the ending: thus, for example, ápas work, apás
active; táras quickness, tarás quick; yáças glory, yaçás glorious. A few other similar adjectives
— as tavás mighty, vedhás pious — are without corresponding nouns.
b. Original adjectives in is do not occur (as to alleged desiderative adjectives in is, see 392
d). But in us are found as many adjectives as nouns (about ten of each class); and in several
instances adjective and noun stand side by side, without difference of accent such as appears in
the stems in as: e.g. tápus heat and hot; vápus wonder and wonderful.
418. Adjective compounds having nouns of this division as final member are very common:
thus, sumánas favorably minded; dīrghā́yus long-lived; çukráçocis having brilliant brightness.
The stem-form is the same for all genders, and each gender is inflected in the usual manner,
the stems in as making their nom. sing. masc. and fem. in ās (like án̄giras, above). Thus, from
sumánas, the nom. and accus. are as follows:
Singular.
Dual.
Plural.
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
m.
f.
n.
N.
sumánās
-nas
sumánasāu
-nasī
sumánasas
-nāṅsi
A.
sumánasam
-nas
and the other cases (save the vocative) are alike in all genders.
a. In Veda and Brāhmaṇa, the neut. nom. sing. is in a considerable number of instances
made in ās, like the other genders.
b. From dīrghā́yus, in like manner:
N.
dīrghā́yus
dīrghā́yuṣāu
-yuṣī
dīrghā́yuṣas
-yūṅṣi
A.
dīrghā́yuṣam
-yus
I.
dīrghā́yuṣā
dīrghā́yurbhyām
dīrghā́yurbhis
etc.
etc.
etc.
419. The stem anehás unrivalled (defined as meaning time in the later language) forms the
nom. sing. masc. and fem, anehā́.
C. Derivative stems in an.
420. The stems of this division are those made by the three suffixes अन् an, मन् man, and वन्
van, together with a few of more questionable etymology which are inflected like them. They
are almost exclusively masculine and neuter.
421. The stem has a triple form. In the strong cases

of the masculine, the vowel of the ending is prolonged to आ ā; in the weakest cases it is in
general struck out altogether; in the middle cases, or before a case-ending beginning with a
consonant, the final न् n is dropped. The न् n is also lost in the nom. sing. of both genders
(leaving आ ā as final in the masculine, अ a in the neuter).
a. The peculiar cases of the neuter follow the usual analogy (311 b): the nom.-acc.-voc. pl.
have the lengthening to आ ā, as strong cases; the nom.-acc.-voc. du., as weakest cases, have
the loss of अ a — but this only optionally, not necessarily.
b. In the loc. sing., also, the a may be either rejected or retained (compare the
corresponding usage with ṛ-stems: 373). And after the m or v of man or van, when these are
preceded by another consonant, the a is always retained, to avoid a too great accumulation of
consonants.
422. The vocative sing. is in masculines the pure stem; in neuters, either this or like the
nominative. The rest of the inflection requires no description.
423. As to accent, it needs only to be remarked that when, in the weakest cases, an acute
á of the suffix is lost, the tone is thrown forward upon the ending.
424. Examples of declension. As such may be taken राजन् rā́jan m. king; आन् ātmán m. soul,
self; नामन् nā́man n. name. Thus:
Singular
N.
राजा
rā́jā
आा
ātmā́
नाम
nā́ma
A.
राजानम्
rā́jānam
आानम्
ātmā́nam
नाम
nā́ma
I.
राा
rā́jñā
आना
ātmánā
नाा
nā́mnā
D.
राे
rā́jñe
आने
ātmáne
नाे
nā́mne

Ab. G.
रास्
rā́jñas
आनस्
ātmánas
नास्
nā́mnas
L.
राि, राजिन
rā́jñi, rā́jani
आिन
ātmáni
नाि, नामिन
nā́mni, nā́mani
V.
राजन्
rā́jan
आन्
ā́tman
नामन्, नाम
nā́man, nā́ma
Dual:
N. A. V.
राजानौ
rā́jānāu
आानौ
ātmā́nāu
नाी, नामनी
nā́mnī, nā́manī
I. D. Ab.
राजाम्
rā́jabhyām
आाम्
ātmábhyām
नामाम्
nā́mabhyām
G. L.
राोस्
rā́jños
आनोस्
ātmános
नाोस्
nā́mnos
Plural:
N.
राजानस्
rā́jānas
आानस्
ātmā́nas
नामािन
nā́māni
A.
रास्
rā́jñas
आनस्
ātmánas
नामािन
nā́māni
I.
राजिभस्
rā́jabhis
आिभस्
ātmábhis
नामिभस्
nā́mabhis
D. Ab.
राजस्
rā́jabhyas
आस्
ātmábhyas
नामस्
nā́mabhyas
G.
रााम्
rā́jñām
आनाम्
ātmánām
नााम्
nā́mnām
L.
राजसु
rā́jasu
आसु
ātmásu
नामसु
nā́masu
a. The weakest cases of mūrdhán 
m. head, would be accented mūrdhnā́, mūrdhné,
mūrdhnós, mūrdhnás (acc. pl.), mūrdhnā́m, etc.; and so in all similar cases (loc. sing., mūrdhní
or mūrdháni).
425. Vedic Irregularities. a. Here, as elsewhere, the ending of the nom.-acc.-voc. du. masc.
is usually ā instead of āu.
b. The briefer form (with ejected a) of the loc. sing., and of the neut. nom.-acc.-voc. du., is
quite unusual in the older language. RV. writes once çatadā́vni, but it is to be read çatadā́vani;
and similar cases occur in AV. (but also several times -mni). In the Brāhmaṇas, too, such forms
as dhāmani and sāmanī are very much more common than such as ahni and lomnī.

c. But throughout both Veda and Brāhmaṇa, an abbreviated form of the loc. sing., with the
ending i omitted, or identical with the stem, is of considerably more frequent occurrence than
the regular form: thus, mūrdhán, kárman, ádhvan, beside mūrdháni etc. The n has all the usual
combinations of a final n: e. g. mūrdhann asya, mūrdhant sa, mūrdnaṅs tvā.
d. In the nom.-acc. pl. neut., also, an abbreviated form is common, ending in ā or (twice as
often) a, instead of āni: thus, bráhma and bráhmā, beside bráhmāṇi: compare the similar series
of endings from a-stems, 329 c.
e. From a few stems in man is made an abbreviated instr. sing., with loss of m as well as of
a: thus, mahinā́, prathinā́, variṇā́, dānā́, preṇā́, bhūnā́, for mahimnā́ etc. And drāghmā́ and
raçmā́ (RV., each once) are perhaps for drāghmáṇā, raçmánā.
f. Other of the weakest cases than the loc. sing. are sometimes found with the a of the
suffix retained: thus, for example, bhū́manā, dā́mane, yā́manas, ukṣáṇas (accus. pl.), etc. In the
infinitive datives (970 d) — trā́maṇe, vidmáne, dāváne, etc. — the a always remains. About as
numerous are the instances in which the a, omitted in the written form of the text, is, as the
metre shows, to be restored in reading.
g. The voc. sing. in vas, which is the usual Vedic form from stems in vant (below, 454 b), is
found also from a few in van, perhaps by a transfer to the vant-declension : thus, ṛtāvas,
evayāvas, khidvas (?), prātaritvas, mātariçvas, vibhāvas.
h. For words of which the a is not made long in the strong cases, see the next paragraph.
426. A few stems do not make the regular lengthening of a in the strong cases (except the
nom. sing.). Thus:
a. The names of divinities, pūṣán, aryamán: thus, pūṣā́, pūṣáṇam, pūṣṇā́, etc.
b. In the Veda, ukṣán bull (but also ukṣā́ṇam); yóṣan maiden; vṛ́ṣan virile, bull (but vṛ́ṣāṇam
and vṛ́ṣāṇas are also met with); tmán, abbreviation of ātmán; and two or three other scattering
forms: anarváṇam, jémanā. And in a number of additional instances, the Vedic metre seems to
demand a where ā is written.
427. The stems çván m. dog and yúvan young have in the weakest cases the contracted
form çún and yū́n (with retention of the accent); in the strong and middle cases they are
regular. Thus, çvā́, çvā́nam, çúnā, çúne, etc., çvábhyām, çvábhis, etc.; yúvā, yúvānam, yū́nā,
yúvabhis, etc.
a. In dual, RV. has once yū́nā for yúvānā.
428. The stem maghávan generous (later, almost exclusively a name of Indra) is contracted
in the weakest cases to maghón: thus, maghávā, maghávānam, maghónā, maghóne, etc.

a. The RV. has once the weak form maghónas in nom. pl.
b. Parallel with this is found the stem maghávant (division E); and from the latter alone in
the older language are made the middle cases: thus, maghavadbhis, maghavatsu, etc. (not
maghavabhis etc.).
429. a. Stems in a, ma, va, parallel with those in an, man, van, and doubtless in many cases
derived from those through transitional forms, are frequent in both the earlier and the later
language, particularly as final members of compounds.
b. A number of an-stems are more or less defective, making a part of their forms from other
stems. Thus:
430. a. The stem áhan n. day is in the later language used only in the strong and weakest
cases, the middle (with the nom. sing., which usually follows their analogy) coming from áhar
o r áhas: namely, áhar nom.-acc. sing., áhobhyām, áhobhis, etc. (PB. has aharbhis); but áhnā
etc., áhni or áhani (or áhan), áhnī or áhanī, áhāni (and, in V., áhā).
b. In the oldest language, the middle cases áhabis, áhabhyas, áhasu also occur.
c. In composition, only ahar or ahas is used as preceding member; as final member, ahar,
ahas, ahan, or the derivatives aha, ahna.
d. The stem ū́dhan n. udder exchanges in like manner, in the old language, with ū́dhar and
ū́dhas, but has become later an as-stem only (except in the fem ūdhnī of adjective compounds):
thus, ū́dhar or ū́dhas, ū́dhnas, ū́dhan or ū́dhani, ū́dhabhis, ū́dhaḥsu. As derivative from it are
made both ūdhanyà and ūdhasya.
431. The neuter stems akṣán eye, asthán bone, dadhán curds, sakthán thigh, form in the
later language only the weakest cases, akṣṇā́, asthné, dadhnás, sakthní or saktháni, and so on;
the rest of the inflection is made from stems in i, ákṣi etc.: see above, 343 i.
a. In the older language, other cases from the an-stems occur: thus, akṣā́ṇi, akṣábhis, and
akṣasu; asthā́ni, asthábhis, and asthábhyas; sakthā́ni.
432. The neuter stems asán blood, yakán liver, çakán ordure, āsán mouth, udán water,
doṣán fore-arm, yūṣán broth, are required to make their nom.-acc.-voc. in all numbers from the
parallel stems ásṛj, yákṛt, çákṛt, āsyà, údaka (in older language udaká) , dós, yūṣá, which are
fully inflected.
a. Earlier occurs also the dual doṣáṇī.
433. The stems pánthan m. road is reckoned in the later language as making the complete
set of strong cases, with the irregularity that the nom.-voc. sing. adds a s. The corresponding
middle cases are made from pathí, and the weakest from path. Thus:

from pánthan — pánthās, pánthānam; pánthānāu; pánthānas;
from pathí — pathíbhyām; pathíbhis, pathíbhyas, pathíṣu;
from path — pathā́, pathé, pathás, pathí; pathós; pathás or páthas (accus.), pathā́m.
a. In the oldest language (RV.), however, the strong stem is only pánthā: thus, pánthās,
nom. sing.; pánthām, acc. sing.; pánthās, nom. pl.; and even in AV., pánthānam and pánthānas
are rare compared with the others. From pathí occur also the nom. pl. patháyas and gen. pl.
pathīnā́m. RV. has once pāthás, acc. pl., with long ā.
434. The stems mánthan m. stirring-stick, and ṛbhukṣán m., an epithet of Indra, are given
by the grammarians the same inflection with pánthan; but only a few cases have been found in
use. In V. occur from the former the acc. sing. mánthām, and gen. pl. mathīnā́m (like the
corresponding cases from pánthan); from the latter, the nom. sing. ṛbhukṣā́s and voc. pl.
ṛbhukṣās, like the corresponding Vedic forms of pánthan; but also the acc. sing. ṛbhukṣáṇam
and nom. pl. ṛbhukṣáṇas, which are after quite another model.
Adjectives
435. Original adjective stems in an are almost exclusively those made with the suffix van, as
yájvan sacrificing, sútvan pressing the soma, jítvan conquering. The stem is masc and neut.
only (but sporadic cases of its use as fem. occur in RV.); the corresponding fem. stem is made
in varī: thus, yájvarī, jítvarī.
436. Adjective compounds having a noun in an as final member are inflected after the
model of noun-stems; and the masculine forms are sometimes used also as feminine; but usually
a special feminine is made by adding ī to the weakest form of the masculine stem: thus,
sómarājñī, kīlā́lodhnī, ékamūrdhnī, durṇā́mnī.
437. But (as was pointed out above: 429 a) nouns in an occurring as final members of
compounds often substitute a stem in a for that in an: thus, -rāja, -janma, -adhva, -aha; their
feminine is in ā. Occasional exchanges of stems in van and in vant also occur: thus, vivásvan
and vivásvant.
a. The remaining divisions of the consonantal declension are made up of adjective stems
only.
D. Derivative stems (adjective) in in.
438. The stems of this division are those formed with the suffixes इन् in, िमन् min, िवन् vin.
They are mas-

culine and neuter only; the corresponding feminine is made by adding ई ī.
a. The stems in in are very numerous, since almost any noun in a in the language may form
a possessive derivative adjective with this suffix: thus, bála strength, balín m. n. balínī f.
possessing strength, strong. Stems in vin (1232), however, are very few, and those in min
(1231) still fewer.
439. Their inflection is quite regular, except that they lose their final न् n in the middle
cases (before an initial consonant of the ending), and also in the nom. sing., where the
masculine lengthens the इ i by way of compensation. The voc. sing. is in the masculine the bare
stem; in the neuter, either this or like the nominative.
a. In all these respects, it will be noticed, the in-declension agrees with the an-declension;
but it differs from the latter in never losing the vowel of the ending.
440. Examples of inflection. As such may be taken बिलन् balín strong. Thus:
Singular.
Dual.
Plural.
m.
n.
m.
n.
m.
n.
N.
बली
balī́
बिल
balí
बिलनौ
balínāu
बिलनी
balínī
बिलनस्
balínas
बलीिन
balī́ni
A.
बिलनम्
balínam
बिल
balí
I.
बिलना
balínā
बिलाभ्
balíbhyām
बिलिभस्
balíbhis
D.
बिलने
balíne
बिलस्
balíbhyas
Ab.
बिलनस्
balínas
G.
बिलनोस्
balínos
बिलनाम्
balínām
L.
बिलिन
balíni
बिलषु
balíṣu
V.
बिलन
bálin
बिलन, बिल
bálin, báli
बिलनौ
bálināu
बिलनी
bálinī
बिलनस्
bálinas
बलीिन
bálīni

a. The derived feminine stem in inī is inflected, of course, like any other feminine in
derivative ī (364).
441. a. There are no irregularities in the inflection of in-stems, in either the earlier
language or the later — except the usual Vedic dual ending in ā instead of āu.
b. Stems in in exchange with stems in i throughout the whole history of the language, those
of the one class being developed out of those of the other often through transitional forms. In a
much smaller number of cases, stems in in are expanded to stems in ina: e.g. çākiná (RV.),
çuṣmiṇa (B.), barhiṇa, bhajina.
E. Derivative stems (adjective) in ant (or at).
442. These stems fall into two sub-divisions: 1. those made by the suffix अ् ant (or अत् at),
being, with a very few exceptions, active participles, present and future; 2. those made by the
possessive suffixes म् mant and व् vant (or मत् mat and वत् vat). They are masculine and
neuter only; the corresponding feminine is made by adding ई ī.
1. Participles in ant or at.
443. The stem has in general a double form, a stronger and a weaker, ending respectively
in अ् ant and अत् at. The former is taken in the strong cases of the masculine, with, as usual,
the nom.-acc.-voc. pl. neuter; the latter is taken by all the remaining cases.
a. But, in accordance with the rule for the formation of the feminine stem (below, 449), the
future participles, and the present participles of verbs of the tud-class or accented á-class (752),
and of verbs of the ad-class or root-class ending in ā, are by the grammarians allowed to make
the nom.-acc.-voc. du. neut. from either the stronger or the weaker stem; and the present
participles from all other present-stems ending in a are required to make the same from the
strong stem.
444. Those verbs, however, which in the 3d pl. pres. active lose न् n of the usual ending ि
nti (550 b), lose it also in the present participle, and have no distinction of strong and weak
stem.

a. Such are the verbs forming their present-stem by reduplication without adding a: namely,
those of the reduplicating or hu-class (655) and the intensives (1012): thus, from √hu, present-
stem juhu, participle-stem júhvat; intensive-stem johu, intensive participle-stem jóhvat. Further,
the participles of roots apparently containing a contracted reduplication: namely, cákṣat, dā́çat,
dā́sat, çā́sat, sáçcat; the aorist participle dhákṣat, and vāghát (?). Vavṛdhánt (RV., once), which
has the n notwithstanding its reduplication, comes, like the desiderative participles (1032), from
a stem in a: compare vāvṛdhánta, vāvṛdhásva.
b. Even these verbs are allowed by the grammarians to make the nom.-acc.-voc. pl. neut. in
anti.
445. The inflection of these stems is quite regular. The nom. sing. masc. comes to end in
अन् an by the regular (150) loss of the two final consonants from the etymological form अ्
ants. The vocative of each gender is like the nominative.
446. Stems accented on the final syllable throw the accent forward upon the case-ending in
the weakest cases (not in the middle also).
a. In the dual neut. (as in the feminine stem) from such participles, the accent is ántī if the
n is retained, atī́ if it is lost.
447. Examples of declension. As such may serve भव् bhávant being, अद् adánt eating, जुत्
júhvat sacrificing. Thus:
Singular:
N.
भवन्
bhávan
भवत्
bhávat
अदन्
adán
अदत्
adát
जुत्
júhvat
जुत्
júhvat
A.
भवम्
bhávantam
भवत्
bhávat
अदम्
adántam
अदत्
adát
जुतम्
júhvatam
जुत्
júhvat
I.
भवता
bhávatā
अदता
adatā́
जुता
júhvatā
D.
भवते
bhávate
अदते
adaté
जुते
júhvate
Ab. G.
भवतस्
bhávatas
अदतस्
adatás
जुतस्
júhvatas
L.
भवित
bhávati
अदित
adatí
जुित
júhvati

V.
भवन्
bhávan
भवत्
bhávat
अदन्
ádan
अदत्
ádat
जुत्
júhvat
Dual:
N. A. V.
भवौ
bhávantāu
भवी
bhávantī
अदौ
adántāu
अदती
adatī́
जुतौ
júhvatāu
जुती
júhvatī
I. D. Ab.
भवाम्
bhávadbhyām
अदाम्
adádbhyām
जुाम्
júhvadbhyām
G. L.
भवतोस्
bhávatos
अदतोस्
adatós
जुतोस्
júhvatos
Plural:
N. V.
भवस्
bhávantas
भवि
bhávanti
अदस्
adántas
अदि
adánti
जुतस्
júhvatas
जुित
júhvati
A.
भवतस्
bhávatas
भवि
bhávanti
अदतस्
adatás
अदि
adánti
जुतस्
júhvatas
जुित
júhvati
I.
भविस्
bhávadbhis
अदिस्
adádbhis
जुिस्
júhvadbhis
D. Ab.
भवस्
bhávadbhyas
अदस्
adádbhyas
जुस्
júhvadbhyas
G.
भवताम्
bhávatām
अदताम्
adatā́m
जुताम्
júhvatām
L.
भवु
bhávatsu
अदु
adátsu
जुु
júhvatsu
a. The future participle bhaviṣyánt may form in nom. etc. dual neuter either bhaviṣyántī or
bhaviṣyatī́; tudánt, either tudántī or tudatī́; yā́nt (√yā), either yā́ntī or yātī́. And júhvat, in nom.
etc. plural neuter, may make also júhvanti (beside júhvati, as given in the paradigm above).
b. But these strong forms (as well as bhávantī, du., and its like from present-stems in
unaccented a) are quite contrary to general analogy, and of somewhat doubtful character. No
example of them is quotable, either from the older or from the later language. The cases
concerned, indeed, would be everywhere of rare occurrence.
448. The Vedic derivations from the model as above given are few. The dual ending āu is
only one sixth as common as ā. Anomalous accent is seen in a case or two: acodáte,
rathirāyátām, and vāghádbhis (if this is a participle). The only instance in V. of nom. etc. pl.
neut. is sā́nti, with lengthened ā (compare the forms in ānti, below, 451 a, 454 c); one or two
examples in anti are quotable from B.

449. The feminine participle-stem, as already stated, is made by adding ई ī to either the
strong or the weak stem-form of the masc.-neut. The rules as to which of the two forms shall
be taken are the same with those given above respecting the nom. etc. dual neuter; namely:
a. Participles from tense-stems ending in unaccented a add ī to the strong stem-form, or
make their feminines in antī.
b. Such are the bhū or unaccented a-class and the dīv or ya-class of present-stems (chap.
IX.), and the desideratives and causatives (chap. XIV.): thus, from √bhū (stem bháva), bhávantī;
from √dīv (stem dī́vya) , dī́vyantī; from búbhūṣa and bhāváya (desid. and caus. of √bhū),
búbhūṣantī and bhāváyantī.
c. Exceptions to this rule are now and then met with, even from the earliest period. Thus,
RV. has járatī, and AV. the desiderative síṣāsatī; in B. occur vadatī, çocatī, tṛpyatī, and in S.
further tiṣṭhatī, and the causative namayatī; while in the epics and later such cases (including
desideratives and causatives) are more numerous (about fifty are quotable), though still only
sporadic.
d. Participles from tense-stems in accented á may add the feminine-sign either to the strong
or to the weak stem-form, or may make their feminines in ántī or in atī́ (with accent as here
noted).
e. Such are the present-stems of the tud or accented á-class (751 ff.), the s-futures (932 ff.),
and the denominatives (1053 ff.): thus, from √tud (stem tudá), tudántī or tudatī́; from bhaviṣyá
(fut. of √bhū), bhaviṣyántī or bhaviṣyatī́; from devayá (denom. of devá), devayántī or devayatī́.
f. The forms in ántī from this class are the prevailing ones. No future fem. participle in atī́
is quotable from the older language. From pres.-stems in á are found there ṛñjatī́ and siñcstī́
(RV.), tudatī́ and pinvatī (AV.) From denominatives, devayatī́ (RV.), durasyatī́ and çatrūyatī́ (AV.).
In BhP. occurs dhakṣyatī.
g. Verbs of the ad or root-class (611 ff.) ending in ā are given by the grammarians the
same option as regard the feminine of the present participle: thus, from √yā, yā́ntī or yātī́. The
older language affords no example of the former, so far as noted.
h. From other tense-stems than those already specified — that is to say, from the remaining
classes of present-stems and from the intensives — the feminine is formed in atī́ (or, if the stem
be otherwise accented than on the final, in atī) only.
i. Thus, adatī́ from √ad; júhvatī from √hu; yuñjatī́ from √yuj; sunvatī́ from √su; kurvatī́ from
√kṛ; krīṇatī́ from √krī; dédiçatī from dédiç (intens. of √diç).

j. Feminine stems of this class are occasionally (but the case is much less frequent than its
opposite: above, c) found with the nasal: thus, yántī (AV., once), undántī (ÇB.; but probably
from the secondary á-stem), gṛhṇantī (S.), and, in the epics and later, such forms as bruvantī,
rudantī, cinvantī, kurvantī, jānantī, muṣṇantī.
450. A few words are participial in form and inflection, though not in meaning. Thus:
a. bṛhánt (often written vṛhánt) great; it is inflected like a participle (with bṛhatī́ and bṛhánti
in du. and pl. neut.).
b. mahánt great; inflected like a participle, but with the irregularity that the a of the ending
is lengthened in the strong forms: thus, mahā́n, mahā́ntam; mahā́ntāu (neut. mahatī́); mahā́ntas,
mahā́nti: instr. mahatā́ etc.
c. pṛ́ṣant speckled, and (in Veda only) rúçant shining.
d . jágat moveable, lively (in the later language, as neuter noun, world), a reduplicated
formation from √gam go; its nom. etc. neut. pl. is allowed by the grammarians to be only
jáganti.
e. ṛhánt small (only once, in RV., ṛhaté).
f. All these form their feminine in atī only: thus, bṛhatī́, mahatī́, pṛ́ṣatī and rúçatī (contrary
to the rule for participles), jágatī.
g. For dánt tooth, which is perhaps of participial origin, see above, 396.
451. The pronominal adjectives íyant and kíyant are inflected like adjectives in mant and
vant, having (452) íyān and kíyān as nom. masc. sing., íyatī and kíyatī as nom. etc. du. neut.
and as feminine stems, and íyanti and kíyanti as nom. etc. plur. neut.
a. But the neut. pl. íyanti and the loc. sing. (?) kíyāti are found in RV.
2. Possessives in mant or vant.
452. The adjectives formed by these two suffixes are inflected precisely alike, and very
nearly like the participles in अ् ant. From the latter they differ only by lengthening अ a in the
nom. sing. masc.
a. The voc. sing. is in an, like that of the participle (in the later language, namely: for that
of the oldest, see below, 454 b). The neut. nom. etc. are in the dual only atī (or átī), and in the
plural anti (or ánti).
b. The feminine is always made from the weak stem: thus, matī, vatī (or mátī, vátī). One or
two cases of nī instead of ī are met with: thus, antárvatnī (B. and later), patívatnī (C.).

c. The accent, however, is never thrown forward (as in the participle) upon the case-ending
or the feminine ending.
453. To illustrate the inflection of such stems, it will be sufficient to give a part of the
forms of पुम् paçumánt possessing cattle, and भगव् bhágavant fortunate, blessed. Thus:
Singular:
m.
n.
m.
n.
N.
पुमान्
paçumā́n
पुमत्
paçumát
भगवान्
bhágavān
भगवत्
bhágavat
A.
पुमम्
paçumántam
पुमत्
paçumát
भगवम्
bhágavantam
भगवत्
bhágavat
I.
पुमता
paçumátā
भगवता
bhágavatā
etc.
etc.
V.
पुमन्
páçuman
पुमत्
páçumat
भगवन्
bhágavan
भगवत्
bhágavat
Dual:
N. A. V.
पुमौ
paçumántāu
पुमती
paçumátī
भगवौ
bhágavantāu
भगवती
bhágavatī
etc.
etc.
Plural:
N. V.
पुमस्
paçumántas
पुमि
paçumánti
भगवस्
bhágavantas
भगवि
bhágavanti
A.
पुमतस्
paçumátas
पुमि
paçumánti
भगवतस्
bhágavatas
भगवि
bhágavanti
I.
पुमिस्
paçumádbhis
भगविस्
bhágavadbhis
etc.
etc.
454. Vedic Irregularities. a. In dual masc. nom. etc., ā (for āu) is the greatly prevailing
ending.
b. In voc. sing. masc., the ending in the oldest language (RV.) is almost always in as instead
of an (as in the perfect participle: below, 462 a): thus, adrivas, harivas, bhānumas, haviṣmas.
Such vocatives in RV. occur more than a hundred times, while not a single unquestionable
instance of one in an is to be found. In the other Vedic texts, vocatives in as are extremely
rare (but bhagavas and its contraction bhagos are met with, even in the later language); and in
their reproduction of RV

passages the as is usually changed to an. It was pointed out above (425 g) that the RV. makes
the voc. in as also apparently from a few an-stems.
C. In RV., the nom. etc. pl. neut., in the only two instances that occur, ends in ānti instead
o f anti: thus, ghṛtávānti, paçumā́nti. No such forms have been noted elsewhere in the older
language: the SV. reads anti in its version of the corresponding passages, and a few examples
of the same ending are quotable from the Brāhmaṇas: thus, tāvanti, etā́vanti, yā́vanti,
ghṛtávanti, pravanti, ṛtumanti, yugmanti. Compare 448, 451.
d. In a few (eight or ten) more or less doubtful cases, a confusion of strong and weak forms
of stem is made; they are too purely sporadic to require reporting. The same is true of a case
or two where a masculine form appears to be used with a feminine noun.
455. The stem árvant running, steed, has the nom. sing. árvā, from árvan; and in the older
language also the voc. arvan and accus. árvāṇam.
456. Besides the participle bhávant, there is another stem bhávant, frequently used in
respectful address as substitute for the pronoun of the second person (but construed, of course,
with a verb in the third person), which is formed with the suffix vant, and so declined, having
in the nom. sing, bhávān; and the contracted form bhos of its old-style vocative bhavas is a
common exclamation of address: you, sir! Its origin has been variously explained; but it is
doubtless a contraction of bhágavant.
457. The pronominal adjectives tā́vant, etā́vant, yā́vant, and the Vedic ī́vant, mā́vant,
tvā́vant, etc., are inflected like ordinary derivatives from nouns.
F. Perfect Participles in vāṅs.
458. The active participles of the perfect tense-system are quite peculiar as regards the
modifications of their stem. In the strong cases, including the nom.-acc.-voc. pl. neut, the form
of their suffix is वांस् vāṅs, which becomes, by regular process (150), vān in the nom. sing., and
which is shortened to वन् van in the voc. sing. In the weakest cases, the suffix is contracted
into उष् uṣ. In the middle cases, including the nom.-acc.-voc. neut. sing., it is changed to वत् vat.
a. A union-vowel i, if present in the strong and middle cases, disappears in the weakest,
before uṣ.

459. The forms as thus described are masculine and neuter only; the corresponding
feminine is made by adding ई ī to the weakest form of stem, ending thus in उषी úṣī.
460. The accent is always upon the suffix, whatever be its form.
461. Examples of inflection. To show the inflection of these participles, we may take the
stems िवांस् vidvā́ṅs knowing (which has irregular loss of the usual reduplication and of the
perfect meaning) from √िव vid, and तिवांस् tasthivā́ṅs having stood from √ा sthā.
Singular:
m.
n.
m.
n.
N.
िवान्
vidvā́n
िवत्
vidvát
तिवान्
tasthivā́n
तिवत्
tasthivát
A.
िवांसम्
vidvā́ṅsam
िवत्
vidvát
तिवांसम्
tasthivā́ṅsam
तिवत्
tasthivát
I.
िवषा
vidúṣā
तुषा
tasthúṣā
D.
िवषे
vidúṣe
तुषे
tasthúṣe
Ab. G.
िवषस्
vidúṣas
तुषस्
tasthúṣas
L.
िविष
vidúṣi
तुिष
tasthúṣi
V.
िवन्
vídvan
िवत्
vídvat
तिवन्
tásthivan
तिवत्
tásthivat
Dual:
N. A. V.
िवांसौ
vidvā́ṅsāu
िवषी
vidúṣī
तिवांसौ
tasthivā́ṅsāu
तुषी
tasthúṣī
I. D. Ab.
िवाम्
vidvádbhyām
तिवाम्
tasthivádbhyām
G. L.
िवषोस्
vidúṣos
तुषोस्
tasthúṣos

Plural:
N. V.
िवांसस्
vidvā́ṅsas
िवांिस
vidvā́ṅsi
तिवांसस्
tasthivā́ṅsas
तिवांिस
tasthivā́ṅsi
A.
िवषस्
vidúṣas
िवांिस
vidvā́ṅsi
तुषस्
tasthúṣas
तिवांिस
tasthivā́ṅsi
I.
िविस्
vidvádbhis
तिविस्
tasthivádbhis
D.
िवस्
vidvádbhyas
तिवस्
tasthivádbhyas
Ab. G.
िवषाम्
vidúṣām
तुषाम्
tasthúṣām
L.
िवु
vidvátsu
तिवु
tasthivátsu
a. The feminine stems of these two participles are िवषी vidúṣī and तुषी tasthúṣī.
b. Other examples of the different stems are:
from √kṛ — cakṛvā́ṅs, cakṛvát, cakrúṣ, cakrúṣī;
from √nī — ninīvā́ṅs, ninīvát, ninyúṣ, ninyúṣī;
from √bhū — babhūvā́ṅs, babhūvát, babhūvúṣ, babhūvúṣī;
from √tan — tenivā́ṅs, tenivát, tenúṣ, tenúṣī.
462. a. In the oldest language (RV.), the vocative sing. masc. (like that of vant and mant-
stems: above, 454 b) has the ending vas instead of van: thus, cikitvas (changed to -van in a
parallel passage of AV.), titirvas, dīdivas, mīḍhvas.
b. Forms from the middle stem, in vat, are extremely rare earlier: only three ( tatanvát and
vavṛtvát, neut. sing., and jāgṛvádbhis, instr. pl.), are found in RV., and not one in AV. And in
the Veda the weakest stem (not, as later, the middle one) is made the basis of comparison and
derivation: thus, vidúṣṭara, ádāçuṣṭara, mīḍhúṣṭama, mīḍhúṣmant.
c. An example or two of the use of the weak stem-form for cases regularly made from the
strong are found in RV.: they are cakrúṣam, acc. sing., and ábibhyuṣas, nom. pl.; emuṣám, by
its accent (unless an error), is rather from a derivative stem emuṣá; and ÇB. has proṣúṣam.
Similar instances, especially from vidvā́ṅs, are now and then met with later (see BR., under
vidvā́ṅs).
d. The AV. has once bhaktivā́ṅsas, as if a participial form from a noun; but K. and TB. give
in the corresponding passage bhaktivā́nas; cakhvā́ṅsam (RV., once) is of doubtful character;
okivā́ṅsā (RV., once) shows a reversion to guttural form of the final of √uc, elsewhere unknown.

G. Comparatives in yāṅs or yas.
463. The comparative adjectives of primary formation (below, 467) have a double form of
stem for masculine and neuter: a stronger, ending in यांस् yāṅs (usually ईयांस् īyāṅs) in the strong
cases, and a weaker, in यस् yas (or ईयस् īyas), in the weak cases (there being no distinction of
middle and weakest). The voc. sing. masc. ends in यन् yan (but for the older language see
below, 465 a).
a. The feminine is made by adding ई ī to the weak masc.-neut. stem.
464. As models of inflection, it will be sufficient to give a part of the forms of ेयस् çréyas
better, and of गरीयस् gárīyas heavier. Thus:
Singular.
N.
ेयान्
çréyān
ेयस्
çréyas
गरीयान्
gárīyān
गरीयस्
gárīyas
A.
ेयांसम्
çréyāṅsam
ेयस्
çréyas
गरीयांसम्
gárīyāṅsam
गरीयस्
gárīyas
I.
ेयसा
çréyasā
गरीयसा
gárīyasā
etc.
etc.
V.
ेयन्
çréyan
ेयस्
çréyas
गरीयन्
gárīyan
गरीयस्
gárīyas
Dual:
N. A. V.
ेयांसौ
çréyāṅsāu
ेयसी
çréyasī
गरीयांसौ
gárīyāṅsāu
गरीयसी
gárīyasī
etc.
etc.
Plural:
N. V.
ेयांसस्
çréyāṅsas
ेयांिस
çréyāṅsi
गरीयांसस्
gárīyāṅsas
गरीयांिस
gárīyāṅsi
A.
ेयसस्
çréyasas
ेयांिस
çréyāṅsi
गरीयसस्
gárīyasas
गरीयांिस
gárīyāṅsi
I.
ेयोिभस्
çréyobhis
गरीयोिभस्
gárīyobhis
etc.
etc.

a. The feminine stems of these adjectives are ेयसी çréyasī and गरीयसी gárīyasī.
485. a. The Vedic voc. masc. (as in the two preceding divisions: 454 b, 462 a) is in yas
instead of yan: thus, ojīyas, jyāyas (RV.: no examples elsewhere have been noted).
b. No example of a middle case occurs in RV. or AV.
c. In the later language are found a very few apparent examples of strong cases made from
the weaker stem-form: thus, kanīyasam and yavīyasam acc. masc., kanīyasāu du., yavīyasas
nom. pl.
Comparison.
466. Derivative adjective stems having a comparative and superlative meaning — or often
also (and more originally) a merely intensive value — are made either directly from roots (by
primary derivation), or from other derivative or compound stems (by secondary derivation).
a. The subject of comparison belongs more properly to the chapter of derivation; but it
stands in such near relation to inflection that it is, in accordance with the usual custom in
grammars, conveniently and suitably enough treated briefly here.
467. The suffixes of primary derivation are ईयस् īyas (or ईयांस् īyāṅs) for the comparative and
इ iṣṭha for the superlative. The root before them is accented, and usually strengthened by
gunating, if capable of it — or, in some cases, by nasalization or prolongation. They are much
more frequently and freely used in the oldest language than later; in the classical Sanskrit, only
a limited number of such comparatives and superlatives are accepted in use; and these attach
themselves in meaning for the most part to other adjectives from the same root, which seem to
be their corresponding positives; but in part also they are artificially connected with other
words, unrelated with them in derivation.
a. Thus, from √kṣip hurl come kṣépīyas and kṣépiṣṭha, which belong in meaning to kṣiprá
quick; from √vṛ encompass come várīyas and váriṣṭha, which belong to urú broad; while, for
example,

kánīyas and kániṣṭha are attached by the grammarians to yúvan young, or álpa small; and
várṣīyas and várṣiṣṭha to vṛddhá old.
468. From Veda and Brāhmaṇa together, considerably more than a hundred instances of this
primary formation in īyas and iṣṭha (in many cases only one of the pair actually occurring) are
to be quoted.
a. About half of these (in RV., the decided majority) belong, in meaning as in form, to the
bare root in its adjective value, as used especially at the end of compounds, but sometimes also
independently: thus, from √tap burn comes tápiṣṭha excessively burning; from √yaj offer come
yájīyas and yájiṣṭha better and best (or very well) sacrificing; from √yudh fight comes yódhīyas
fighting better; — in a few instances, the simple root is also found used as corresponding
positive: thus, jū́ hasty, rapid with jávīyas and jáviṣṭha.
b. In a little class of instances (eight), the root has a preposition prefixed, which then takes
the accent: thus, ā́gamiṣṭha especially coming hither; vícayiṣṭha best clearing away; — in a
couple of cases (áçramiṣṭha, áparāvapiṣṭa, ástheyas), the negative particle is prefixed; — in a
single word (çámbhaviṣṭha), an element of another kind.
c. The words of this formation sometimes take an accusative object (see 271 e).
d. But even in the oldest language appears not infrequently the same attachment in meaning
to a derivative adjective which (as pointed out above) is usual in the later speech.
e. Besides the examples that occur also later, others are met with like váriṣṭha choicest
(vára choice) , bárhiṣṭha greatest (bṛhánt great) , óṣiṣṭha quickest (óṣam quickly), and so on.
Probably by analogy with these, like formations are in a few cases made from the apparently
radical syllables of words which have no otherwise traceable root in the language: thus,
kradhīyas and kradhiṣṭha (K.) from kṛdhú, sthávīyas and stháviṣṭha from sthūrá, çáçīyas (RV.)
from çáçvant, áṇīyas (AV.) and áṇiṣṭha (TS.) from aṇú; and so on. And yet again, in a few
exceptional cases, the suffixes īyas and iṣṭha are applied to stems which are themselves
palpably derivative: thus, ā́çiṣṭha 
from āçú (RV.: only case), tī́kṣṇīyas (AV.) from tīkṣṇá,
bráhmīyas and bráhmiṣṭha (TS. etc.) from bráhman, dhármiṣṭha (TA.) from dhárman, dráḍhiṣṭha
(TA.: instead of dárhiṣṭha) from dṛḍhá, rághīyas (TS.) from raghu. These are beginnings, not
followed up later, of the extension of the formation to unlimited use.
f. In návīyas or návyas and náviṣṭha, from náva new, and in sányas from sána old (all RV.),
we have also formations unconnected with verbal roots.
469. The stems in iṣṭha are inflected like ordinary adjectives in a, and make their feminines
in ā; those in īyas have a peculiar declension, which has been described above (463 ff.).

470. Of peculiarities and irregularities of formation, the following may be noticed:
a. The suffix īyas has in a few instances the briefer form yas, generally as alternative with
the other: thus, távīyas and távyas, návīyas and návyas, vásīyas and vásyas, pánīyas and
pányas; and so from rabh and sah; sányas occurs alone. From bhū come bhū́yas and bhū́yiṣṭha,
beside which RV. has also bhávīyas.
b. Of roots in ā, the final blends with the initial of the suffix to e: thus, sthéyas, dhéṣṭha,
yéṣṭha; but such forms are in the Veda generally to be resolved, as dháïṣṭha, yáïṣṭha. The root
jyā forms jyéṣṭha, but jyā́yas (like bhū́yas).
c. The two roots in ī, prī and çrī, form préyas and préṣṭha and çréyas and çréṣṭha.
d. From the root of ṛjú come, without strengthening, ṛ́jīyas and ṛ́jiṣṭha; but in the older
language also, more regularly, rájīyas and rájiṣṭha.
471. The suffixes of secondary derivation are तर tara and तम tama. They are of almost
unrestricted application, being added to adjectives of every form, simple and compound, ending
in vowels or in consonants — and this from the earliest period of the language until the latest.
The accent of the primitive remains (with rare exceptions) unchanged; and that form of stem is
generally taken which appears before an initial consonant of a case-ending (weak or middle
form).
a. Examples (of older as well as later occurrence) are: from vowel-stems, priyátara,
váhnitama, rathī́tara and rathī́tama (RV.), cā́rutara, potṛ́tama, saṁraktatara; — from consonant-
stems, çáṁtama, çáçvattama, mṛḍayáttama, tavástara 
and tavástama, tuvíṣṭama, vápuṣṭara,
tapasvítara, yaçasvítama, bhágavattara, hiraṇyavāçīmattama; — from compounds, ratnadhā́tama,
abhibhū́tara, 
sukṛ́ttara, 
pūrbhíttama, 
bhūyiṣṭabhā́ktama, 
bhūridā́vattara, 
çúcivratatama,
strīkāmatama.
b. But in the Veda the final n of a stem is regularly retained; thus, madíntara and
madíntama, vṛṣántama; and a few stems even add a nasal: thus, surabhíntara, rayíntama,
madhúntama. In a case or two, the strong stem of a present participle is taken: thus,
vrā́dhanttama, sáhanttama; and, of a perfect participle, the weakest stem: thus, vidúṣṭara,
mīḍhúṣṭama. A feminine final ī is shortened: thus, devitamā (RV.), tejasvinitamā (K.).

c. In the older language, the words of this formation are not much more frequent than
those of the other: thus, in RV. the stems in tara and tama are to those in īyas and iṣṭha as
three to two; in AV., only as six to five: but later the former win a great preponderance.
472. These comparatives and superlatives are inflected like ordinary adjectives in a, forming
their feminine in ā.
473. a. That (especially in the Veda) some stems which are nouns rather than adjectives
form derivatives of comparison is natural enough, considering the uncertain nature of the
division-line between substantive and adjective value. Thus, we have vīrátara, vīrátama,
váhnitama, mātṛ́tama, nṛ́tama, marúttama, and so on.
b. The suffixes tara and tama also make forms of comparison from some of the pronominal
roots, as ka, ya, i (see below, 520); and from certain of the prepositions, as ud; and the
adverbially used accusative (older, neuter, -taram; later, feminine, -tarām) of a comparative in
tara from a preposition is employed to make a corresponding comparative to the preposition
itself (below, 1119); while -tarām and -tamām make degrees of comparison from a few adverbs:
thus, natarā́m, natamā́m, kathaṁtarām, kutastarām, addhātamā́m, nīcāistarām, etc.
c. By a wholly barbarous combination, finding no warrant in the earlier and more genuine
usages of the language, the suffixes of comparison in their adverbial feminine form, -tarām and
-tamām, are later allowed to be added to personal forms of verbs: thus, sīdatetarām (R.: the
only case noted in the epics) is more despondent, vyathayatitarām disturbs more, alabhatatarām
obtained in a higher degree , hasiṣyatitarām will laugh more. No examples of this use of - tamām
are quotable.
d. The suffixes of secondary comparison are not infrequently added to those of primary,
forming double comparatives and superlatives: thus, garīyastara, çreṣṭhatara and çréṣṭhatama,
pāpīyastara, pāpiṣṭhatara and -tama, bhūyastaram, etc.
a. The use of tama as ordinal suffix is noted below (487); with this value, it is accented on
the final, and makes its feminine in ī: thus, çatatamá m. n., çatatamī́ f., hundredth.
474. From a few words, mostly prepositions, degrees of comparison are made by the briefer
suffixes ra and ma: thus, ádhara and adhamá, ápara and apamá, ávara and avamá, úpara and
upamá, ántara, ántama, paramá, madhyamá, caramá, antima, ādima, paçcima. And ma is also
used to make ordinals (below, 487).

CHAPTER VI.
NUMERALS.
475. The simple cardinal numerals for the first ten numbers (which are the foundation of
the whole class), with their derivatives, the tens, and with some of the higher members of the
decimal series, are as follows:
1
एक
éka
10
दश
dáça
100
शत
çatá
2

dvá
20
वशित
viṅçatí
1000
सह
sahásra
3
ि
trí
30
शत्
triṅçát
10,000
अयुत
ayúta
4
चतु
catúr
40
चारशत्
catvāriṅçát
100,000
ल
lakṣá
5
प
páñca
50
पाशत्
pañcāçát
1,000,000
युत
prayúta
6
षष्
ṣáṣ
60
षि
ṣaṣṭí
10,000,000
कोिट
kóṭi
7
स
saptá
70
सित
saptatí
108 अबुद
arbudá
8
अ
aṣṭá
80
अशीित
açītí
109 महाबुद
mahārbuda
9
नव
náva
90
नवित
navatí
1010 खव
kharvá
10
दश
dáça
100
शत
çatá
1011 िनखव
nikharva
a. The accent saptá and aṣṭá is that belonging to these words in all accentuated texts;
according to the grammarians, they are sápta and áṣṭa in the later language. See below, 483.
b. The series of decimal numbers may be carried still further; but there are great
differences among the different authorities with

regard to their names; and there is more or less of discordance even from ayúta on.
c. Thus, in the TS. and MS. we find ayúta, niyúta, prayúta, árbuda, nyàrbuda, samudrá,
mádhya, ánta, parārdhá; K. reverses the order of niyúta and prayúta, and inserts badva after
nyarbuda (reading nyarbudha): these are probably the oldest recorded series.
d. In modern time, the only numbers in practical use above thousand are lakṣa (lac or lakh)
and koṭi (crore); and an Indian sum is wont to be pointed thus: 123,45,67,890, to signify 123
crores, 45 lakhs, 67 thousand, eight hundred and ninety.
e. As to the alleged stem-forms pañcan etc., see below, 484. As to the form ṣakṣ instead of
ṣaṣ, see above, 146b. The stem dva appears in composition and derivation also as dvā and dvi;
catúr in composition is accented cátur. The older form of aṣṭa is aṣṭā: see below, 483. Forms in
-çat and -çati for the tens are occasionally interchanged: e. g. viṅçat (MBh. R.), triṅçati (AB.),
pañcāçati (RT.).
f. The other numbers are expressed by the various composition and syntactical combination
of those given above. Thus :
476. The odd numbers between the even tens are made by prefixing the (accented) unit to
the ten to which its value is to be added: but with various irregularities. Thus:
a. eka in 11 becomes ekā, but is elsewhere unchanged;
b. dva becomes everywhere dvā; but in 42–72 and in 92 it is interchangeable with dvi, and
in 82 dvi alone is used;
c. for tri is substituted its nom. pl. masc. tráyas; but tri itself is also allowed in 43–73 and
in 93, and in 83 tri alone is used;
d. ṣaṣ becomes ṣo in 16, and makes the initial d of daça lingual (199d); elsewhere its final
undergoes the regular conversion (226 b, 198 b) to ṭ or ḍ or ṇ; and in 96 the n of navati is
assimilated to it (199c);
e. aṣṭa becomes aṣṭā (483) in 18–38, and has either form in the succeeding combinations.
f. Thus:
11
ékādaça
31
ékatriṅçat
61
ékaṣaṣṭi
81
ékāçīti
12
dvā́daça
32
dvā́triṅçat
62
dvā́ṣaṣṭi
82
dvyàçīti
dvíṣaṣṭi
13
tráyodaça
33
tráyastriṅçat
63
tráyaḥṣaṣṭi
83
tryàçīti
tríṣaṣṭi
14
cáturdaça
34
cátustriṅçat
64
cátuḥṣaṣṭi
84
cáturaçīti
15
páñcadaça
35
páñcatriṅçat
65
páñcaṣaṣṭi
85
páñcāçīti
16
ṣóḍaça
36
ṣáṭtriṅçat
66
ṣáṭṣaṣṭi
86
ṣáḍaçīti
17
saptádaça
37
saptátriṅçat
67
saptáṣaṣṭi
87
saptā́çīti
18
aṣṭā́daça
38
aṣṭā́triṅçat
68
aṣṭáṣaṣṭi
88
aṣṭā́çīti
aṣṭā́ṣaṣṭi
19
návadaça
39
návatriṅçat
69
návaṣaṣṭi
89
návāçīti


g. The numbers 21–29 are made like those for 31–39; the numbers 41–49, 51–59, 71–79,
and 91–99 are made like those for 61–69.
h. The forms made with dvā and trayas are more usual than those with dvi and tri, which
are hardly to be quoted from the older literature (V. and Br.). The forms made with aṣṭā
(instead of aṣṭa) are alone found in the older literature (483), and are usual in the later.
477. The above are the normal expressions for the odd numbers. But equivalent substitutes
for them are also variously made. Thus:
a. By use of the adjectives ūna deficient and adhika redundant, in composition with lesser
numbers which are to be subtracted or added, and either independently qualifying or (more
usually) in composition with larger numbers which are to be increased or diminished by the
others: thus, tryūnaṣaṣṭiḥ sixty deficient by three (i. e. 57) ; aṣṭādhikanavatiḥ ninety increased
by eight (i. e. 98); ekādhikaṁ çatam a hundred increased by one  (i. e. 101); pañconaṁ çatam
100 less 5 (i. e. 95). For the nines, especially, such substitutes as ekonaviṅçatiḥ 20 less 1, or
19, are not uncommon; and later the eka 1 is left off, and ūnaviṅçati etc. have the same value.
b. A case-form of a smaller number, generally éka one is connected by ná not with a larger
number from which it is to be deducted: thus, ékayā ná triṅçát (ÇB. PB. KB.) not thirty by one
(29); dvābhyāṁ ná ’çītím (ÇB.) not eighty by two (78); pañcábhir ná catvā́ri çatā́ni (ÇB.) not
four hundred by five (395); ékasmān ná pañcāçát (in ordinal) 49 (TS.); ékasyāi (abl. fem. : 307
h) ná pañcāçát 49 (TS.); most often, ékān (i. e. ékāt, irregular abl. for ékasmāt) ná viṅçatíḥ 19;
ékān ná çatám 99. This last form is admitted also in the later language; the others are found in
the Brāhmaṇas.
c. Instances of multiplication by a prefixed number are occasionally met with: thus, triṣaptá
thrice seven; triṇavá thrice nine; tridaçá thrice ten.
d. Of course, the numbers to be added together may be expressed by independent words,
with connecting and: thus, náva ca navatíç ca, or náva navatíç ca ninety and nine; dvāú ca
viṅçatíç ca two and twenty. But the connective is also (at least, in the older language) not
seldom omitted: thus, navatír náva 99; triṅçátaṁ trī́n 33; açītír aṣṭāú 88.
478. The same methods are also variously used for forming the odd numbers above 100.
Thus:
a. The added number is prefixed to the other, and takes the accent: for example, ékaçatam
101; aṣṭāçatam 108; triṅçácchatam 130; aṣṭāviṅçatiçatam 128; cátuḥsahasram (RV.: unless the
accent is wrong) 1004; açītisahasram 1080.

b. Or, the number to be added is compounded with adhika redundant, and the compound is
either made to qualify the other number or is further compounded with it: thus, pañcādhikaṁ
çatam or pañcādhikaçatam 105. Of course, ūna deficient (as also other words equivalent to ūna
or adhika) may be used in the same way: thus, pañconaṁ çatam 95, ṣaṣṭiḥ pañcavarjitā 55;
çatam abhyadhikaṁ ṣaṣṭitaḥ 160.
c. Syntactical combinations are made at convenience: for example, dáça çatáṁ ca 110;
çatám ékaṁ ca 101.
479. Another usual method (beginning in the Brāhmaṇas) of forming the odd numbers above
100 is to qualify the larger number by an adjective derived from the smaller, and identical with
the briefer ordinal (below, 487): thus, dvādaçáṁ çatám, 112 (lit'ly a hundred of a 12-sort , or
characterised by 12); catuçcatvāriṅçáṁ çatám 144; ṣaṭṣaṣṭáṁ çatám 166.
480. To multiply one number by another, among the higher or the lower denominations, the
simplest and least ambiguous method is to make of the multiplied number a dual or plural,
qualified by the other as any ordinary noun would be; and this method is a common one in all
ages of the language. For example: páñca pañcāçátas five fifties (250) ; náva navatáyas nine
nineties (810) ; açītíbhis tisṛ́bhis with three eighties  (240) ; páñca çatā́ni five hundreds; trī́ṇi
sahásrāṇi three thousands; ṣaṣṭíṁ sahásrāṇi 60,000; daça ca sahasrāṇy aṣṭāu ca çatāni 10,800:
and, combined with addition, trī́ṇi çatā́ni tráyastriṅçataṁ ca 333; sahasre dve pañconaṁ çatam
eva ca 2095.
a. In an exceptional case or two, the ordinal form appears to take the place of the cardinal
as multiplicand in a like combination: thus, ṣaṭtriṅçā́ṅç ca catúraḥ (RV.) 36x4 (lit. four of the
thirty-six kind); trī́ṅr ekādaçā́n (RV.) or traya ekādaçāsaḥ (ÇÇS. viii. 21. 1) 11x3.
b. By a peculiar and wholly illogical construction, such a combination as trīṇi ṣaṣṭiçatāni,
which ought to signify 480 (3x100+60), is repeatedly used in the Brāhmaṇas to mean 360
(3x100+60); so also dvé catustriṅçé çaté 234 (not 268); dvāṣaṣṭāni trīṇi çatāni 362; and other
like cases. And even R. has trayaḥ çataçatārdhāḥ 350.
481. But the two factors, multiplier and multiplied, are also, and in later usage more
generally, combined into a compound (accented on the final); and this is then treated as an
adjective, qualifying the numbered noun; or else its neuter or feminine (in ī) singular is used
substantively: 
thus, daçaçatā́s 1000; ṣaṭçatāiḥ padātibhiḥ 
(MBh.) with 600 foot-soldiers;
tráyastriṅçat triçatā́ḥ ṣaṭsahasrāḥ (AV.) 6333; dviçatám or dviçatī́ 200; aṣṭādaçaçatī 1800.
a. In the usual absence of accentuation, there arises sometimes a question as to how a
compound number shall be understood: whether aṣṭaçatam, for example, is aṣṭáçatam 108 or
aṣṭaçatám 800, and the like.

482. Inflection. The inflection of the cardinal numerals is in many respects irregular. Gender
is distinguished only by the first four.
a. Eka one is declined after the manner of a pronominal adjective (like sárva, below, 524);
its plural is used in the sense of some, certain ones. Its dual does not occur.
b. Occasional forms of the ordinary declension are met with: thus, éke (loc. sing.), ékāt (477
b).
c. In the late literature, eka is used in the sense of a certain, or even sometimes almost of
a, as an indefinite article. Thus, eko vyāghraḥ (H.) a certain tiger; ekasmin dine on a certain
day; haste daṇḍam ekam ādāya (H.) taking a stick in his hand .
d. Dva two is dual only, and is entirely regular: thus, N. A. V. dvāú (dvā́, Veda) m., dvé f.
n.; I. D. Ab. dvā́bhyām; G. L. dváyos.
e. Tri three is in masc. and neut. nearly regular, like an ordinary stem in i; but the genitive
is as if from trayá (only in the later language: the regular trīṇā́m occurs once in RV.). For the
feminine it has the peculiar stem tisṛ́, which is inflected in general like an ṛ-stem; but the nom.
and accus. are alike, and show no strengthening of the ṛ; and the ṛ is not prolonged in the gen.
(excepting in the Veda). Thus:
m.
n.
f.
N.
tráyas
trī́ṇi
tisrás
A.
trī́n
trī́ṇi
tisrás
I.
tribhís
tisṛ́bhis
D. Ab.
tribhyás
tisṛ́bhya
G.
trayāṇā́m
tisṛṇā́m
L.
triṣú
tisṛ́ṣu
f. The Veda has the abbreviated neut. nom. and accus. trī́. The accentuation tisṛbhís,
tisṛbhyás, tisṛ́ṇām, and tisṛṣú is said to be also allowed in the later language. The stem tisṛ
occurs in composition in tisṛdhanvá (B.) a bow with three arrows .
g . Catúr four has catvā́r (the more original form) in the strong cases; in the fem. it
substitutes the stem cátasṛ, apparently akin with tisṛ́, and inflected like it (but with anomalous
change of accent, like that in the higher numbers: see below, 483). Thus:
m.
n.
f.
N.
catvā́ras
catvā́ri
cátasras
A.
catúras
catvā́ri
cátasras
I.
catúrbhis
catasṛ́bhis
D. Ab.
catúrbhyas
catasṛ́bhyas
G.
caturṇā́m
catasṛṇā́m
L.
catúrṣu
catasṛ́ṣu.

h. The use of n before ām of the gen. masc. and neut. after a final consonant of the stem is
(as in ṣaṣ: below, 483) a striking irregularity. The more regular gen. fem. catasṝṇām also
sometimes occurs. In the later language, the accentuation of the final syllable instead of the
penult is said to be allowed in inst., dat.-abl., and loc.
483. The numbers from 5 to 19 have no distinction of gender, nor any generic character.
They are inflected, somewhat irregularly, as plurals, save in the nom.-acc., where they have no
proper plural form, but show the bare stem instead. Of ṣáṣ (as of catúr) , nām is the gen.
ending, with mutual assimilation (198 b) of stem-final and initial of the termination. Aṣṭá (as
accented in the older language) has an alternative fuller form, aṣṭā́, which is almost exclusively
used in the older literature (V. and B), both in inflection and in composition (but some
compounds with aṣṭa are found as early as the AV.); its nom.-acc. is aṣṭá (usual later: found in
RV. once, and in AV.), or aṣṭā́ (RV.), or aṣṭāú (most usual in RV.; also in AV., B., and later).
a. The accent is in many respects peculiar. In all the accented texts, the stress of voice lies
on the penult before the endings bhis, bhyas, and su, from the stems in a, whatever be the
accent of the stem: thus, pañcábhis from páñca, navábhyas from náva, daçásu from dáça,
navadaçábhis from návadaça, ekādaçábhyas from ékādaça, dvādaçásu from dvā́daça (according
to the grammarians, either the penult or the final is accented in these forms in the later
language). In the gen. pl., the accent is on the ending (as in that of i-, u-, and ṛ-sterns): thus,
pañcadaçānā́m, saptadaçānā́m. The cases of ṣaṣ, and those made from the stem-form aṣṭā, have
the accent throughout upon the ending.
b. Examples of the inflection of these words are as follows:
N.A.
páñca
ṣáṭ
aṣṭāú
aṣṭá
I.
pañcábhis
ṣaḍbhís
aṣṭābhís
aṣṭábhis
D. Ab.
pañcábhyas
ṣaḍbhyás
aṣṭābhyás
aṣṭábhyas
G.
pañcānā́m
ṣaṇṇā́m
aṣṭānā́m
L.
pañcásu
ṣaṭsú
aṣṭāsú
aṣṭásu.
c . Saptá (in the later language sápta, as áṣṭa for aṣṭá) and náva and dáça, with the
compounds of dáça (11–19), are declined like páñca, and with the same shift of accent (or with
alternative shift to the endings, as pointed out above).
484. The Hindu grammarians give to the stems for 5 and 7–19 a final n: thus, pañcan,
saptan, aṣṭan, navan, daçan, and ekādaçan etc. This, however, has nothing to do with the
demonstrably original final nasal of 7, 9, and 10 (compare septem, novem, decem; seven, nine,
ten); it is only owing to the fact that, starting from such a stem-form, their inflection is made
to assume a more regular aspect, the nom.-acc. having the form of a neut. sing. in an, and the
instr., dat.-abl., and loc. that of a neut. or masc. pl. in an: compare nā́ma, nā́mabhis, nā́ma-

bhyas, nā́masu — the gen. alone being, rather, like that of an a-stem: compare daçānā́m with
índrāṇām and nā́mnām or ātmánām. No trace whatever of a final n is found anywhere in the
language, in inflection or derivation or composition, from any of these words (though ÇB. has
twice daçaṁdaçín, for the usual daçadaçín).
485. a. The tens, viṅçatí and triṅçát etc., with their compounds, are declined regularly, as
feminine stems of the same endings, and in all numbers.
b. Çatá and sahásra are declined regularly, as neuter (or, rarely, in the later language, as
masculine) stems of the same final, in all numbers.
c. The like is true of the higher numbers — which have, indeed, no proper numeral
character, but are ordinary nouns.
486. Construction. As regards their construction with the nouns enumerated by them —
a. The words for 1 to 19 are in the main used adjectively, agreeing in case, and, if they
distinguish gender, in gender also, with the nouns: thus, daçábhir vīrāíḥ with ten heroes ; yé
devā́ divy ékādaça sthá (AV.) what eleven gods of you are in heaven ; pañcásu jáneṣu among the
five tribes; catasṛbhir gīrbhíḥ with four songs. Rarely occur such combinations as dáça
kaláçānām (RV.) ten pitchers, ṛtūnāṁ ṣaṭ (R.) six seasons.
b. The numerals above 19 are construed usually as nouns, either taking the numbered noun
as a dependent genitive, or standing in the singular in apposition with it: thus, çataṁ dāsīḥ or
çataṁ dāsīnām a hundred slaves or a hundred of slaves; viṅçatyā́ háribhiḥ with twenty bays;
ṣaṣṭyā́ṁ çarátṣu in 60 autumns; çaténa pā́çāiḥ with a hundred fetters ; çatáṁ sahásram ayútaṁ
nyàrbudaṁ jaghā́na çakró dásyūnām (AV.) the mighty [Indra] slew a hundred, a thousand, a
myriad, a hundred million, of demons. Occasionally they are put in the plural, as if used more
adjectively: thus, pañcāçadbhir bāṇāiḥ with fifty arrows.
c. In the older language, the numerals for 5 and upward are sometimes used in the nom.-
acc. form (or as if indeclinably) with other cases also: thus, páñca kṛṣṭíṣu among the five races ;
saptá rṣīṇām of seven bards; sahásram ṛ́ṣibhiḥ with a thousand bards; çatám pūrbhíḥ with a
hundred strongholds. Sporadic instances of a like kind are also met with later.
487. Ordinals. Of the classes of derivative words coming from the original or cardinal
numerals, the ordinals are by far the most important; and the mode of their formation may best
be explained here.

Some of the first ordinals are irregularly made: thus,
a. éka 1 forms no ordinal; instead is used prathamá (i. e. pratama foremost) ; ādya (from
ādi beginning) appears first in the Sūtras, and ādima much later;
b. from dvá 2, and trí 3, come dvitī́ya and tṛtī́ya (secondarily, through dvita and abbreviated
trita);
c. catúr 4, ṣáṣ 6, and saptá 7, take the ending tha: thus, caturthá, ṣaṣṭhá, saptátha; but for
fourth are used also turī́ya and túrya, and saptátha belongs to the older language only;
pañcatha, for fifth, is excessively rare;
d. the numerals for 5 and 7 usually, and for 8, 9, 10, add ma, forming pañcamá, saptamá,
aṣṭamá, navamá, daçamá;
e. for 11th to 19th, the forms are ekādaçá, dvādaçá, and so on (the same with the
cardinals, except change of accent); but ekādaçama etc. occasionally occur also;
f. for the tens and intervening odd numbers from 20 onward, the ordinal has a double form
— one made by adding the full (superlative) ending tamá to the cardinal: thus, viṅçatitamá,
triṅçattamá, açītitamá, etc.; the other, shorter, in a, with abbreviation of the cardinal: thus,
viṅçá 20th; triṅçá 30th; catvāriṅçá 40th; pañcāçá 50th; ṣaṣṭá 60th; saptatá 70th; açītá 80th;
navatá 90th; and so likewise ekaviṅçá 21st, catustriṅçá 34th; aṣṭācatvāriṅçá 48th; dvāpañcāçá
52d; ekaṣaṣṭá 61st; and ekānnaviṅçá and ūnaviṅçá and ekonaviṅçá 19th; — and so on. Of these
two forms, the latter and briefer is by far the more common, the other being not quotable from
the Veda, and extremely rarely from the Brāhmaṇas. From 50th on, the briefer form is allowed
by the grammarians only to the odd numbers, made up of tens and units; but it is sometimes
met with, even in the later language, from the simple ten.
g. Of the higher numbers, çatá and sahásra form çatatamá and sahasratamá; but their
compounds have also the simpler form: thus, ekaçatá or ekaçatatama 101st.
h. Of the ordinals, prathamá (and ādya), dvitī́ya, tṛtī́ya, and turī́ya (with túrya) form their
feminine in ā; all the rest make it in ī.
488. The ordinals, as in other languages, have other than ordinal offices to fill; and in
Sanskrit especially they are general adjectives to the cardinals, with a considerable variety of
meanings, as fractionals, as signifying composed of so many parts  or so-many-fold, or containing
so many, or (as was seen above, 479) having so many added.
a. In a fractional sense, the grammarians direct that their accent be shifted to the first
syllable: thus, dvítīya half; tṛ́tīya third part; cáturtha quarter; and so on. But in accented texts
only tṛ́tīya third, and cáturtha (ÇB.) and túrīya quarter, are found so treated; for half occurs

only ardhá; and caturthá (MS. etc.), pañcamá, and so on, are accented as in their ordinal use.
489. There are other numeral derivatives: thus —
a. multiplicative adverbs, as dvís twice, trís thrice, catús four times;
b. adverbs with the suffixes dhā (1104) and ças (1106): for example, ekadhā́ in one way,
çatadhā́ in a hundred ways ; ekaças one by one, çataçás by hundreds;
c. collectives, as dvítaya or dvayá a pair, dáçjataya or daçát a decade;
d. adjectives like dvika composed of two, pañcaka consisting of five  or fives;
and so on; but their treatment belongs rather to the dictionary, or to the chapter on
derivation.
CHAPTER VII.
PRONOUNS.
490. The pronouns differ from the great mass of nouns and adjectives chiefly in that they
come by derivation from another and a very limited set of roots, the so-called pronominal or
demonstrative roots. But they have also many and marked peculiarities of inflection — some of
which, however, find analogies in a few adjectives; and such adjectives will accordingly be
described at the end of this chapter.
Personal Pronouns.
491. The pronouns of the first and second persons are the most irregular and peculiar of
all, being made up of fragments coming from various roots and combinations of roots. They
have no distinction of gender.

a. Their inflection in the later language is as follows:
Singular :
1st pers.
2d pers.
N.
अहम्
ahám
म्
tvám
A.
माम्, मा
mā́m, mā
ाम्, ा
tvā́m, tvā
I.
मया
máyā
या
tváyā
D.
मम्, मे
máhyam, me
तुम्, ते
túbhyam, te
Ab.
मत्
mát
त्
tvát
G.
मम, मे
máma, me
तव, ते
táva, te
L.
मिय
máyi
िय
tváyi
Dual:
N. A. V.
आवाम्
āvā́m
युवाम्
yuvā́m
I. D. Ab.
आवााम्
āvā́bhyām
युवााम्
yuvā́bhyām
G. L.
आवयोस्
āváyos
युवयोस्
yuváyos
and A. D. G.
नौ
nāu
वाम्
vām
Plural:
N.
वयम्
vayám
यूयम्
yūyám
A.
अान्, नस्
asmā́n, nas
युान्, वस्
yuṣmā́n, vas
I.
अािभस्
asmā́bhis
युािभस्
yuṣmā́bhis
D.
अम्, नस्
asmábhyam, nas
युम्, वस्
yuṣmábhyam, vas

Ab.
अत्
asmát
युत्
yuṣmát
G.
अाकम्, नस्
asmā́kam, nas
युाकम्, वस्
yuṣmā́kam, vas
L.
अासु
asmāsu
युासु
yuṣmāsu
b. The briefer second forms for accus., dat., and gen., in all numbers, are accentless; and
hence they are not allowed to stand at the beginning of a sentence, or elsewhere where any
emphasis is laid.
c. But they may be qualified by accented adjuncts, as adjectives: e. g. te jáyataḥ of thee
when a conqueror, vo vṛtā́bhyaḥ for you that were confined, nas tribhyáḥ to us three (all RV.).
d. The ablative mat is accentless in one or two AV. passages.
492. Forms of the older language. All the forms given above are found also in the older
language; which, however, has also others that afterward disappear from use.
a. Thus, we find a few times the instr. sing. tvā́ (only RV.: like manīṣā́ for manīṣáyā);
further, the loc. or dat. sing. mé (only VS.) and tvé, and the dat. or loc. pl. asmé (which is by
far the commonest of these e-forms) and yuṣmé: their final e is uncombinable (or pragṛhya: 138
b). The VS. makes twice the acc. pl. fem. yuṣmā́s (as if yuṣmā́n were too distinctively a
masculine form). The datives in bhyam are in a number of cases written, and in yet others to
be read as if written, with bhya, with loss of the final nasal; and in a rare instance or two we
have in like manner asmā́ka and yuṣmā́ka in the gen. plural. The usual resolutions of semivowel
to vowel are made, and are especially frequent in the forms of the second person (tuám for
tvám etc.).
b. But the duals, above all, wear a very different aspect earlier. In Veda and Brāhmaṇa and
Sūtra the nominatives are (with occasional exceptions) avam and yuvam, and only the
accusatives āvā́m and yuvā́m (but in RV. the dual forms of 1st pers. chance not to occur, unless
in vā́m[?], once, for āvám); the instr. in RV. is either yuvā́bhyām (occurs also once in AÇS.) or
yuvābhyām; an abl. yuvát appears once in RV., and āvát twice in TS.; the gen.-loc. is in RV.
(only) yuvós instead of yuváyos. Thus we have here a distinction (elsewhere unknown) of five
different dual cases, by endings in part accordant with those of the other two numbers.
493. Peculiar endings. The ending am, appearing in the nom. sing. and pl. (and Vedic du.)
of these pronouns, will be found often, though only in sing., among the other pronouns. The
bhyam (or hyam) of dat. sing. and pl. is met with only here; its relationship with the bhyām,
bhyas, bhis of the ordinary declension is palpable. The t (or

d) of the abl., though here preceded by a short vowel, is doubtless the same with that of the a-
declension of nouns and adjectives. That the nom., dat., and abl. endings should be the same in
sing. and pl. (and in part in the earlier du. also), only the stem to which they are added being
different, is unparalleled elsewhere in the language. The element sma appearing in the plural
forms will be found frequent in the inflection of the singular in other pronominal words: in fact,
the compound stem asma which underlies the plural of aham seems to be the same that
furnishes part of the singular forms of ayam (501), and its value of we to be a specialisation of
the 
meaning these persons. The genitives singular, máma 
and táva, have no analogies
elsewhere; the derivation from them of the adjectives māmaka and tāvaka (below, 516 a)
suggests the possibility of their being themselves stereotyped stems. The gen. pl., asmā́kam and
yuṣmā́kam, are certainly of this character: namely, neuter sing. case-forms of the adjective
stems asmāka and yuṣmāka, other cases of which are found in the Veda.
494. Stem-forms. To the Hindu grammarians, the stems of the personal pronouns are mad
and asmad, and tvad and yuṣmad, because these are forms used to a certain extent, and
allowed to be indefinitely used, in derivation and composition (like tad, kad, etc.: see below,
under the other pronouns). Words are thus formed from them even in the older language —
namely, mátkṛta and mátsakhi and asmátsakhi (RV.), tvádyoni and mattás (AV.), tvátpitṛ and
tvádvivācana (TS.), tvátprasūta and tvaddevatyà and yuvaddevatyà and yuṣmaddevatyà (ÇB.),
asmaddevatya (PB.); but much more numerous are those that show the proper stem in a, or
with the a lengthened to ā: thus, mā́vant; asmatrā́, asmadrúh, etc.; tváyata, tvā́vant, tvā́datta,
tvāníd, tvā́vasu, tvā́hata, 
etc.; yuṣmā́datta, yuṣméṣita, 
etc.; yuvā́vant, yuvā́ku, yuvádhita,
yuvā́datta, yuvā́nīta, etc. And the later language also has a few words made in the same way,
as mādṛç.
a. The Vedas have certain more irregular combinations, with complete forms: thus,
tvā́ṁkāma, tvāmāhuti, māmpaçyá, mamasatyá, asméhiti, ahampūrvá, ahamuttará, ahaṁyú,
ahaṁsana.
b. From the stems of the grammarians come also the derivative adjectives madī́ya, tvadī́ya,
asmadī́ya yuṣmadī́ya, having a possessive value: see below, 516.
c. For sva and svayám, see below, 513.
Demonstrative Pronouns.
495. The simplest demonstrative, त ta, which answers also the purpose of a personal
pronoun of the third person, may be taken as model of a mode of declension usual in

so many pronouns and pronominal adjectives that it is fairly to be called the general
pronominal declension.
a. But this root has also the special irregularity that in the nom. sing. masc. and fem. it has
sás (for whose peculiar euphonic treatment see 176 a,b) and sā, instead of tás and tā́ (compare
Gr. ὁ, ἡ, το, and Goth. sa, so, thata). Thus:
Singular:
m.
n.
f.
N.
सस्
sás
तत्
tát
सा
sā́
A.
तम्
tám
तत्
tát
ताम्
tā́m
I.
तेन
téna
तया
táyā
D.
तै
tásmāi
तै
tásyāi
Ab.
तात्
tásmāt
तास्
tásyās
G.
त
tásya
तास्
tásyās
L.
तिन्
tásmin
ताम्
tásyām
Dual:
N.A.V.
तौ
tāú
ते
té
ते
té
I.D.Ab.
तााम्
tā́bhyām
तााम्
tā́bhyām
G.L.
तयोस्
táyos
तयोस्
táyos
Plural:
N.
ते
té
तािन
tā́ni
तास्
tā́s
A.
तान्
tā́n
तािन
tā́ni
तास्
tā́s
I.
तैस्
tāís
तािभस्
tā́bhis

D. Ab.
तेस्
tébhyas
तास्
tā́bhyas
G.
तेषाम्
téṣām
तासाम्
tā́sām
L.
तेषु
téṣu
तासु
tā́su
b. The Vedas show no other irregularities of inflection than those which belong to all stems
in a and ā: namely, ténā sometimes; usually tā́ for tāú, du.; often tā́ for tā́ni, pl. neut.; usually
tébhis for tāís, instr. pl.; and the ordinary resolutions. The RV. has one more case-form from
the root sa, namely sásmin (occurring nearly half as often as tásmin); and ChU. has once
sasmāt.
496. The peculiarities of the general pronominal declension, it will be noticed, are these:
a. In the singular, the use of t (properly d) as ending of nom.-acc. neut.; the combination of
another element sma with the root in masc. and neut. dat., abl., and loc., and of sy in fem. dat,
abl.-gen., and loc.; and the masc. and neut. loc. ending in, which is restricted to this declension
(except in the anomalous yādṛ́çmin, RV., once). The substitution in B. of āi for ās as fem.
ending (307 h) was illustrated at 365 d.
b. The dual is precisely that of noun-stems in a and ā.
c. In the plural, the irregularities are limited to té for tā́s in nom. masc., and the insertion
o f s instead of n before ām of the gen., the stem-final being treated before it in the same
manner as before su of the loc.
497. The stem of this pronoun is by the grammarians given as tad; and from that form
come, in fact, the derivative adjective tadī́ya, with tattvá, tadvat, tanmaya; and numerous
compounds, such as tacchīla, tajjña, tatkara, tadanantara, tanmātra , etc. These compounds are
not rare even in the Veda: so tádanna, tadvíd, tadvaçá, etc. But derivatives from the true root
ta are also many: especially adverbs, as tátas, tátra, táthā, tadā́ ; the adjectives tā́vant and táti;
and the compound tādṛ́ç etc.
498. Though the demonstrative root ta is prevailingly of the third person, it is also freely
used, both in the earlier language and in the later, as qualifying the pronouns of the first and
second person, giving emphasis to them: thus, sò ‘hám, this I, or I here; sá or sā́ tvám thou
there; te vayam, we here; tasya mama of me here, tasmiṅs tvayi in thee there, and so on.
499. Two other demonstrative stems appear to contain ta as an element; and both, like the
simple ta, substitute sa in the nom. sing. masc. and fem.

a. The one, tya, is tolerably common (although only a third of its possible forms occur) in
RV., but rare in AV., and almost unknown later, its nom. sing., in the three genders, is syás,
syā́, tyát, and it makes the accusatives tyám, tyā́m, tyát, and goes on through the remaining
cases in the same manner as ta. It has in RV. the instr. fem. tyā́ (for tyáyā). Instead of syā as
nom. sing. fem. is also found tyā.
b. The other is the usual demonstrative of nearer position, this here, and is in frequent use
through all periods of the language. It prefixes e to the simple root, forming the nominatives
eṣás, eṣā́, etát — and so on through the whole inflection.
c. The stem tya has neither compounds nor derivatives. But from eta are formed both, in
the same manner as from the simple ta, only much less numerous: thus, etaddā́ (ÇB.),
etadartha, etc., from the so-called stem etat; and etādṛ́ç and etā́vant from eta. And eṣa, like sa
(498), is used to qualify pronouns of the 1st and 2d persons: e. g. eṣā ’ham, ete vayam.
500. There is a defective pronominal stem, ena, which is accentless, and hence used only in
situations where no emphasis falls upon it. It does not occur elsewhere than in the accusative
of all numbers, the instr. sing., and the gen.-loc. dual: thus,
m.
n.
f.
Sing.
A.
enam
enat
enām
I.
enena
enayā
Du.
A.
enāu
ene
ene
G. L.
enayos
enayos
Pl.
A.
enān
enāni
enās
a. The RV. has enos instead of enayos, and in one or two instances accents a form: thus,
enā́m, enā́s (?). AB. uses enat also as nom. neut.
b. As ena is always used substantively, it has more nearly than ta the value of a third
personal pronoun, unemphatic. Apparent examples of its adjectival use here and there met with
are doubtless the result of confusion with eta (499 b).
c. This stem forms neither derivatives nor compounds.
501. The declension of two other demonstratives is so irregularly made up that they have to
be given in full. The one, अयम् ayám etc., is used as a more indefinite demonstrative, this or
that; the other, असौ asāú etc., signifies especially the remoter relation, yon or yonder.
a. They are as follows:

Singular:
m.
n.
f.
m.
n.
f.
N.
अयम्
ayám
इदम्
idám
इयम्
iyám
असौ
asāú
अदस्
adás
असौ
asāú
A.
इमम्
imám
इदम्
idám
इमाम्
imām
अमुम्
amúm
अदस्
adás
अमूम्
amū́m
I.
अनेन
anéna
अनया
anáyā
अमुना
amúnā
अमुया
amúyā
D.
अै
asmāí
अै
asyāí
अमुै
amúṣmāi
अमुै
amúṣyāi
Ab.
अात्
asmā́t
अास्
asyā́s
अमुात्
amúṣmāt
अमुास्
amúṣyās
G.
अ
asyá
अास्
asyā́s
अमु
amúṣya
अमुास्
amúṣyās
L.
अिन्
asmín
अाम्
asyā́m
अमुिन्
amúsmin
अमुाम्
amúsyām
Dual:
N. A.
इमौ
imāú
इमे
imé
इमे
imé
अमू
amū́
I. D. Ab.
आाम्
ābhyā́m
अमूाम्
amū́bhyām
G. L.
अनयोस्
anáyos
अमुयोस्
amúyos
Plural:
N.
इमे
imé
इमािन
imā́ni
इमास्
imā́s
अमी
amī́
अमूिन
amū́ni
अमूस्
amū́s
A.
इमान्
imā́n
इमािन
imā́ni
इमास्
imā́s
अमून्
amū́n
अमूिन
amū́ni
अमूस्
amū́s
I.
एिभस्
ebhís
आिभस्
ābhís
अमीिभस्
amī́bhis
अमूिभस्
amū́bhis
D. Ab.
एस्
ebhyás
आस्
ābhyás
अमीस्
amī́bhyas
अमूस्
amū́bhyas
G.
एषाम्
eṣā́m
आसाम्
āsā́m
अमीषाम्
amī́ṣām
अमूषाम्
amū́ṣām
L.
एषु
eṣú
आसु
āsú
अमीषु
amī́ṣu
अमूषु
amū́ṣu

b. The same forms are used in the older language, without variation, except that (as usual)
imā́ occurs for imāú and imā́ni, and amū́ for amū́ni; amuyā when used adverbially is accented
on the final, amuyā́; asāu (with accent, of course, on the first, ásāu; or without accent, asāu:
314) is used also as vocative; amī, too, occurs as vocative.
502. a. The former of these two pronouns, ayám etc., plainly shows itself to be pieced
together from a number of defective stems. The majority of forms come from the root a, with
which, as in the ordinary pronominal declension, sma (f. sy) is combined in the singular. All
these forms from a have the peculiarity that in their substantive use they are either accented,
as in the paradigm, or accentless (like ena and the second forms from ahám and tvám). The
remaining forms are always accented. From aná come, with entire regularity, anéna, anáyā,
anáyos. The strong cases in dual and plural, and in part in singular, come not less regularly
from a stem imá. And ayám, iyám, idám are evidently to be referred to a simple root i (idám
being apparently a double form: id, like tad etc., with ending am).
b. The Veda has from the root a also the instrumental enā́ and ayā́ (used in general
adverbially), and the gen. loc. du. ayós; from ima, imásya occurs once in RV., imasmāi in AA.,
a n d imāis 
and imeṣu later. The RV. has in a small number of instances the irregular
accentuation ásmāi, ásya, ā́bhis.
c. In analogy with the other pronouns, idám is by the grammarians regarded as
representative stem of this pronominal declension; and it is actually found so treated in a very
small number of compounds (idammáya and idáṁrūpa are of Brāhmaṇa age). As regards the
actual stems, ana furnishes nothing further; from ima comes only the adverb imáthā (RV.,
once); but a and i furnish a number of derivatives, mostly adverbial: thus, for example, átas,
átra, átha, ad-dhā́(?); itás, íd (Vedic particle), idā, ihá, ítara, īm (Vedic particle), īdṛ́ç, perhaps
evá and evám, and others.
503. The other pronoun, asāú etc., has amú for its leading stem, which in the singular takes
in combination, like the a-stems, the element sma (f. sy), and which shifts to amī in part of the
masc. and neut. plural. In part, too, like an adjective u-stem, it lengthens its final in the
feminine. The gen. sing, amúṣya is the only example in the language of the ending sya added
to any other than an a-stem. The nom. pl. amī́ is unique in form; its ī is (like that of a dual)
pragṛhya, or exempt from combination with a following vowel (138 b). Asāú and adás are also
without analogies as regards their endings.
a. The grammarians, as usual, treat adás as representative stem of the declension, and it is
found in this character in an extremely small number of words, as adomūla; adomáya is of
Brāhmaṇa age. The ÇB. has also asāunā́man. But most of the derivatives, as of

the cases, come from amu: thus, amútas, amútra, amúthā, amudā, amúrhi, amuvát, amuka .
b. In the older language occurs the root tva (accentless), meaning one, many a one; it is
oftenest found repeated, as one and another. It follows the ordinary pronominal declension.
From it is made the (also accentless) adverb tvadānīm (MS.).
c. Fragments of another demonstrative root or two are met with: thus, ámas he occurs in a
formula in AV. and in Brāhmaṇas etc.; avós as gen.-loc. dual is found in RV.; the particle u
points to a root u.
Interrogative Pronoun.
504. The characteristic part of the interrogative pronominal root is क k; it has the three
forms क ka, िक ki, क ku; but the whole declensional inflection is from क ka, excepting the nom.-
acc. sing. neut., which is from िक ki, and has the anomalous form िकम् kím (not elsewhere
known in the language from a neuter i-stem). The nom. and accus. sing., then, are as follows:
m.
n.
f.
N.
कस्
kás
िकम्
kím
का
kā́
A.
कम्
kám
िकम्
kím
काम्
kā́m
and the rest of the declension is precisely like that of त ta (above, 495).
a. The Veda has its usual variations, kā́ and kébhis for kā́ni and kāís. It also has, along
with kím, the pronominally regular neuter kád; and kám (or kam) is a frequent particle. The
masc. form kis, corresponding to kim, occurs as a stereotyped case in the combinations nákis
and mā́kis.
505. The grammarians treat kim as representative stem of the interrogative pronoun; and it
is in fact so used in a not large number of words, of which a few — kimmáya, kiṁkará,
kiṁkāmyā́, kíṁdevata, kiṁçīlá, and the peculiar kiṁyú — go back even to the Veda and
Brāhmaṇa. In closer analogy with the other pronouns, the form kad, a couple of times in the
Veda (katpayá, kádartha), and not infrequently later, is found as first member of compounds.
Then, from the real roots ka, ki, ku are made many derivatives; and from ki and ku, especially
the latter, many compounds: thus,

káti, kathā́, kathám, kadā́, katará, katamá, kárhi; kíyant, kīdṛ́ç; kútas, kútra, kúha, kvà, kucará,
kukarman, kumantrin, etc.
506. Various forms of this pronoun, as kad, kim, and ku (and, rarely, ko), at the beginning
of compounds, have passed from an interrogative meaning, through an exclamatory, to the value
of prefixes signifying an unusual quality — either something admirable, or, oftener, something
contemptible. This use begins in the Veda, but becomes much more common in later time.
507. The interrogative pronoun, as in other languages, turns readily in its independent use
also to an exclamatory meaning. Moreover, it is by various added particles converted to an
indefinite meaning: thus, by ca, caná, cid, ápi, vā,  either alone or with the relative ya (below,
511) prefixed: thus, káç caná any one; ná kó ‘pi not any one; yā́ni kā́ni cit whatsoever; yatamát
katamác ca whatever one. Occasionally, the interrogative by itself acquires a similar value.
Relative Pronoun.
508. The root of the relative pronoun is य ya, which from the earliest period of the language
has lost all trace of the demonstrative meaning originally (doubtless) belonging to it, and is
used as relative only.
509. It is inflected with entire regularity according to the usual pronominal declension: thus,
Singular.
Dual.
Plural.
m.
n.
f.
m.
n.
f.
m.
n.
f.
N.
यस्
yás
यत्
yát
या
yā́
यौ
yāú
ये
yé
ये
yé
ये
yé
यािन
yā́ni
यास्
yā́s
A.
याम्
yā́m
यत्
yát
याम्
yā́m
यान्
yā́n
यािन
yā́ni
यास्
yā́s
I.
येन
yéna
यया
yáyā
यााम्
yā́bhyām
यैस्
yāís
यािभस्
yā́bhis
D.
यै
yásmāi
यै
yásyāi
येस्
yébhyas
यास्
yā́bhyas
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
a. The Veda shows its usual variations of these forms: yā́ for yāú and for yā́ni, and yébhis
for yāís; yós for yáyos also occurs once; yénā, with prolonged final, is in RV. twice as common
as yéna. Reso-

lutions occur in yā́bhias, and yéṣaam and yā́saam. The conjunction yā́t is an ablative form
according to the ordinary declension.
510. The use of yát as representative stem begins very early: we have yátkāma in the Veda,
and yatkārín, yaddevatyà in the Brāhmaṇa; later it grows more general. From the proper root
come also a considerable series of derivatives: yátas, yáti, yátra, yáthā, yádā, yádi, yárhi,
yā́vant, yatará, yatamá; and the compound yādṛ́ç.
511. The combination of ya with ka to make an indefinite pronoun has been noticed above
(507). Its own repetition — as yád-yat — gives it sometimes a like meaning, won through the
distributive.
512. One or two marked peculiarities in the Sanskrit use of the relative may be here briefly
noticed:
a. A very decided preference for putting the relative clause before that to which it relates:
thus, yáḥ sunvatáḥ sákhā tásmā índrāya gāyata  (RV.) who is the friend of the soma-presser, to
that Indra sing ye; yáṁ yajñám paribhū́r ási sá íd devéṣu gacchati  (RV.) what offering thou
protectest, that in truth goeth to the gods; yé triṣaptā́ḥ pariyánti bálā téṣāṁ dadhātu me  (AV.)
what thrice seven go about, their strength may he assign to me ; asāú yó adharā́d gṛhás tátra
santv arāyyàḥ (AV.) what house is yonder in the depth, there, let the witches be ; sahá yán me
ásti téna (TB.) along with that which is mine ; haṅsānāṃ vacanaṁ yat tu tan māṁ dahati  (MBh.)
but what the words of the swans were, that burns me ; sarvasya locanaṁ çāstraṁ yasya nā ’sty
andha eva saḥ (H.) who does not possess learning, the eye of everything, blind indeed is he .
The other arrangement, though frequent enough, is notably less usual.
b. A frequent conversion of the subject or object of a verb by an added relative into a
substantive clause: thus, mé ’mám prā́ ”pat pāúruṣeyo vadhó yáḥ (AV.) may there not reach him
a human deadly weapon (lit'ly, what is such a weapon); pári ṇo pāhi yád dhánam (AV.) protect
of us what wealth [there is]; apāmārgó ‘pa mārṣṭu kṣetriyáṃ çapáthaç ca yáh  (AV.) may the
cleansing plant cleanse away the disease and the curse; puṣkareṇa hṛtaṃ rājyaṁ yac cā ’nyad
vasu kiṁcana (MBh.) by Pushkara was taken away the kingdom and whatever other property
[there was].
Other Pronouns: Emphatic, Indefinite.
513. a. The isolated and uninflected pronominal word यम् svayam (from the root sva)
signifies self, own self. By its form it appears to be a nom. sing., and it is often-

est used as nominative, but along with words of all persons and numbers; and not seldom it
represents other cases also.
b. Svayam is also used as a stem in composition: thus, svayaṁjā́, svayambhū́. But sva itself
(usually adjective: below, 516 e) has the same value in composition; and even its inflected
forms are (in the older language very rarely) used as reflexive pronoun.
c. In RV. alone are found a few examples of two indefinite pronouns, sama (accentless) any,
every, and simá every, all.
Nouns used pronominally.
514. a. The noun ātmán soul is widely employed, in the singular (extremely rarely in other
numbers), as reflexive pronoun of all three persons.
b. The noun tanū́ body is employed in the same manner (but in all numbers) in the Veda.
c. The adjective bhavant, f. bhavatī, is used (as already pointed out: 456) in respectful
address as substitute for the pronoun of the second person. Its construction with the verb is in
accordance with its true character, as a word of the third person.
Pronominal Derivatives.
515. From pronominal roots and stems, as well as from the larger class of roots and from
noun-stems, are formed by the ordinary suffixes of adjective derivation certain words and
classes of words, which have thus the character of pronominal adjectives.
Some of the more important of these may be briefly noticed here.
516. Possessives. a. From the representative stems mad etc. are formed the adjectives
madīya, asmadīya, tvadīya, yuṣmadīya, tadīya, and etadīya, which are used in a possessive
sense: relating to me, mine, and so on.
b. Other possessives are māmaká (also māmaka, RV.) and tāvaká, from the genitives máma
and táva. And RV. has once mā́kīna.
c. An analogous derivative from the genitive amúṣya is āmuṣyāyaṇá (AV. etc.) descendant of
such and such a one.
d. It was pointed out above (493) that the "genitives" asmā́kam and yuṣmā́kam are really
stereotyped cases of possessive adjectives.

e. Corresponding to svayám (513) is the possessive svá, meaning own, as relating to all
persons and numbers. The RV. has once the corresponding simple possessive of the second
person, tvá thy.
f. For the use of sva as reflexive pronoun, see above, 513 b.
g. All these words form their feminines in ā.
h. Other derivatives of a like value have no claim to be mentioned here. But (excepting sva)
the possessives are so rarely used as to make but a small figure in the language, which prefers
generally to indicate the possessive relation by the genitive case of the pronoun itself.
517. By the suffix vant are formed from the pronominal roots, with prolongation of their
final vowels, the adjectives mā́vant, tvā́vant, yuṣmā́vant, yuvā́vant, tā́vant, etā́vant, yā́vant,
meaning of my sort, like me, etc. Of these, however, only the last three are in use in the later
language, in the sense of tantus and quantus. They are inflected like other adjective stems in
vant, making their feminines in vatī (452 ff.).
a. Words of similar meaning from the roots i and ki are íyant and kíyant, inflected in the
same manner: see above, 451.
518. The pronominal roots show a like prolongation of vowel in combination with the root
dṛç see, look, and its derivatives -dṛça and (quite rarely) dṛkṣa: thus, mādṛç, -dṛça; tvādṛç, -dṛça;
yuṣmādṛç, -dṛça; tādṛç, -dfta, -dṛkṣa; etādṛç, -dṛça, -dṛkṣa; yādṛç, -dṛça; īdṛ́ç, -dṛ́ça, -dṛ́kṣa; kīdṛ́ç, -
dṛça, -dṛkṣa. They mean of my sort, like or resembling me, and the like, and tādṛç and the
following are not uncommon, with the sense of talis and qualis. The forms in dṛç are unvaried
for gender; those in dṛça (and dṛkṣa?) have feminines in ī.
519. From ta, ka, ya come táti so many, káti how many? yáti as many. They have a quasi-
numeral character, and are inflected (like the numerals páñca etc.: above, 483) only in the
plural, and with the bare stem as nom. and accus.: thus, N.A. táti; I. etc. tátibhis, tátibhyas,
tátīnām, tátiṣu.
520. From ya (in V. and B.) and ka come the comparatives and superlatives yatará and
yatamá, and katará and katamá; and from i, the comparative ítara. For their inflection, see
below, 523.
521. Derivatives with the suffix ka, sometimes conveying a diminutive or a contemptuous
meaning, are made from certain of the pronominal roots and stems (and may, according to the
grammarians, be made from them all): thus, from ta, takám, takát, takā́s; from sa, sakā́; from
ya, yakás, yakā́, yaké; from asāú, asakāú; from amu, amuka.
a. For the numerous and frequently used adverbs formed from pronominal roots, see
Adverbs (below, 1097 ff.).

Adjectives declined pronominally.
522. A number of adjectives — some of them coming from pronominal roots, others more or
less analogous with pronouns in use — are inflected, in part or wholly, according to the
pronominal declension (like त ta, 495), with feminine stems in ā. Thus:
523. The comparatives and superlatives from pronominal roots — namely, katará and
katamá, yatará and yatamá, and ítara; also anyá other, and its comparative anyatará — are
declined like ta throughout.
a. But even from these words forms made according to the adjective declension are
sporadically met with (e. g. itarāyām K.).
b. Anya takes occasionally the form anyat in composition: thus, anyatkāma, anyatsthāna.
524. Other words are so inflected except in the nom.-acc.-voc. sing, neut., where they have
the ordinary adjective form am, instead of the pronominal at (ad). Such are sárva all, víçva all,
every, éka one.
a. These, also, are not without exception, at least in the earlier language (e. g. víçvāya,
víçvāt, víçve RV.; éke loc. sing., AV.).
525. Yet other words follow the same model usually, or in some of their significations, or
optionally; but in other senses, or without known rule, lapse into the adjective inflection.
a. Such are the comparatives and superlatives from prepositional stems: ádhara and
adhamá, ántara and ántama, ápara and apamá, ávara and avamá, úttara and uttamá, úpara and
upamá. Of these, pronominal forms are decidedly more numerous from the comparatives than
from the superlatives.
b. Further, the superlatives (without corresponding comparatives) paramá, caramá,
madhyamá also anyatama (whose positive and comparative belong to the class first mentioned:
523).
c. Further, the words pára distant, other; pū́rva prior, east; dákṣiṇa right, south; paçcima
behind, western; ubháya (f. ubháyī or ubhayī́) of both kinds or parties; néma the one, half; and
the possessive svá.
526. Occasional forms of the pronominal declension are met with from numeral adjectives:
e. g. prathamásyās, tṛtī́yasyām; and from other words having an indefinite numeral character:
thus, álpa few; ardhá half; kévala all; dvítaya of the two kinds; bā́hya outside — and others.
RV. has once samānásmāt.

CHAPTER VIII.
CONJUGATION.
527. The subject of conjugation or verbal inflection involves, as in the other languages of
the family, the distinctions of voice, tense, mode, number, and person.
a. Further, besides the simpler or ordinary conjugation of a verbal root, there are certain
more or less fully developed secondary or derivative conjugations.
528. Voice. There are (as in Greek) two voices, active and middle, distinguished by a
difference in the personal endings. This distinction is a pervading one: there is no active
personal form which does not have its corresponding middle, and vice versa; and it is extended
also in part to the participles (but not to the infinitive).
529. An active form is called by the Hindu grammarians parasmāi padam a word for
another, and a middle form is called ātmane padam a word for one's self: the terms might be
best paraphrased by transitive and reflexive. And the distinction thus expressed is doubtless the
original foundation of the difference of active and middle forms; in the recorded condition of the
language, however, the antithesis of transitive and reflexive meaning is in no small measure
blurred, or even altogether effaced.
a. In the epics there is much effacement of the distinction between active and middle, the
choice of voice being very often determined by metrical considerations alone.
530. Some verbs are conjugated in both voices, others in one only; sometimes a part of the
tenses are inflected only in one voice, others only in the other or in both; of a verb usually
inflected in one voice sporadic forms of the other occur; and sometimes the voice differs
according as the verb is compounded with certain prepositions.

531. The middle forms outside the present-system (for which there is a special passive
inflection: see below, 768 ff.), and sometimes also within that system, are liable to be used
likewise in a passive sense.
532. Tense. The tenses are as follows: 1. a present, with 2. an imperfect, closely related
with it in form, having a prefixed augment; 3. a perfect, made with reduplication (to which in
the Veda is added, 4. a so-called pluperfect, made from it with prefixed augment); 5. an aorist,
of three different formations: a. simple; b. reduplicated; c. sigmatic or sibilant; 6. a future, with
7. a conditional, an augment-tense, standing to it in the relation of an imperfect to a present;
and 8. a second, a periphrastic, future (not found in the Veda).
a. The tenses here distinguished (in accordance with prevailing usage) as imperfect, perfect,
pluperfect, and aorist receive those names from their correspondence in mode of formation with
tenses so called in other languages of the family, especially in Greek, and not at all from
differences of time designated by them. In no period of the Sanskrit language is there any
expression of imperfect or pluperfect time — nor of perfect time, except in the older language,
where the "aorist" has this value; later, imperfect, perfect, and aorist are so many
undiscriminated past tenses or preterits: see below, under the different tenses.
533. Mode. In respect to mode, the difference between the classical Sanskrit and the older
language of the Veda — and, in a less degree, of the Brāhmaṇas — is especially great.
a. In the Veda, the present tense has, besides its indicative inflection, a subjunctive, of
considerable variety of formation, an optative, and an imperative (in 2d and 3d persons). The
same three modes are found, though of much less frequent occurrence, as belonging to the
perfect; and they are made also from the aorists, being of especial frequency from the simple
aorist. The future has no modes (an occasional case or two are purely exceptional).
b. In the classical Sanskrit, the present adds to its indicative an optative and an imperative
— of which last,

moreover, the first persons are a remnant of the old subjunctive. And the aorist has also an
optative, of somewhat peculiar inflection, usually called the precative (or benedictive).
534. The present, perfect, and future tenses have each of them, alike in the earlier and
later language, a pair of participles, active and middle, sharing in the various peculiarities of
the tense-formations; and in the Veda are found such participles belonging also to the aorist.
535. Tense-systems. The tenses, then, with their accompanying modes and participles, fall
into certain well-marked groups or systems:
I. The present-system, composed of the present tense with its modes, its participle, and its
preterit which we have called the imperfect.
II. The perfect-system, composed of the perfect tense (with, in the Veda, its modes and its
preterit, the so-called pluperfect) and its participle.
III. The aorist-system, or systems, simple, reduplicated, and sibilant, composed of the aorist
tense along with, in the later language, its "precative" optative (but, in the Veda, with its
various modes and its participle).
IV. The future-systems: 1. the old or sibilant future, with its accompanying preterit, the
conditional, and its participle; and 2. the new periphrastic future.
536. Number and Person. The verb has, of course, the same three numbers with the noun:
namely, singular, dual, and plural; and in each number it has the three persons, first, second,
and third. All of these are made in every tense and mode — except that the first persons of the
imperative numbers are supplied from the subjunctive.

537. Verbal adjectives and nouns: Participles. The participles belonging to the tense-systems
have been already spoken of above (534). There is besides, coming directly from the root of the
verb, a participle, prevailingly of past and passive (or sometimes neuter) meaning. Future
passive participles, or gerundives, of several different formations, are also made.
538. Infinitives. In the older language, a very considerable variety of derivative abstract
nouns — only in a few sporadic instances having anything to do with the tense-systems — are
used in an infinitive or quasi-infinitive sense; most often in the dative case, but sometimes also
in the accusative, in the genitive and ablative, and (very rarely) in the locative. In the classical
Sanskrit, there remains a single infinitive, of accusative case-form, having nothing to do with
the tense-systems.
539. Gerunds. A so-called gerund (or absolutive) — being, like the infinitive, a stereotyped
case-form of a derivative noun — is a part of the general verb-system in both the earlier and
later language, being especially frequent in the later language, where it has only two forms,
one for simple verbs, and the other for compound. Its value is that of an indeclinable active
participle, of indeterminate but prevailingly past tense-character.
a. Another gerund, an adverbially used accusative in form, is found, but only rarely, both
earlier and later.
540. Secondary conjugations. The secondary or derivative conjugations are as follows: 1. the
passive; 2. the intensive; 3. the desiderative; 4. the causative. In these, a conjugation-stem,
instead of the simple root, underlies the whole system of inflection. Yet there is clearly to be
seen in them the character of a present-system, expanded into a more or less complete
conjugation; and the passive is

so purely a present-system that it will be described in the chapter devoted to that part of the
inflection of the verb.
a. Under the same general head belongs the subject of denominative conjugation, or the
conversion of noun and adjective-stems into conjugation-stems. Further, that of compound
conjugation, whether by the prefixion of prepositions to roots or by the addition of auxiliary
verbs to noun and adjective-stems. And finally, that of periphrastic conjugation, or the looser
combination of auxiliaries with verbal nouns and adjectives.
541. The characteristic of a proper (finite or personal) verb-form is its personal ending. By
this alone is determined its character as regards number and person — and in part also as
regards mode and tense. But the distinctions of mode and tense are mainly made by the
formation of tense and mode-stems, to which, rather than to the pure root, the personal
endings are appended.
a. In this chapter will be given a general account of the personal endings, and also of the
formation of mode-stems from tense-stems, and of those elements in the formation of tense-
stems — the augment and the reduplication — which are found in more than one tense-system.
Then, in the following chapters, each tense-system will be taken up by itself, and the methods
of formation of its stems, both tense-stems and mode-stems, and their combination with the
endings, will be described and illustrated in detail. And the complete conjugation of a few
model verbs will be exhibited in systematic arrangement in Appendix C.
Personal Endings.
542. The endings of verbal inflection are, as was pointed out above, different throughout in
the active and middle voices. They are also, as in Greek, usually of two somewhat varying
forms for the same person in the same voice: one fuller, called primary; the ther briefer, called
secondary. There are also less pervading differences, depending upon other conditions.
a. In the epics, exchanges of primary and secondary active endings eespecially the
substitution of ma, va, ta, for mas, vas, tha) are not infrequent.

b. A condensed statement of all the varieties of ending for each person and number here
follows.
543. Singular: First person, a. The primary ending in the active is mi. The subjunctive,
however (later imperative), has ni instead; and in the oldest Veda this ni is sometimes wanting,
and the person ends in ā (as if the ni of āni were dropped). The secondary ending is properly
m; but to this m an a has come to be so persistently prefixed, appearing regularly where the
tense-stem does not itself end in a (vam for varm or varam in RV., once, and abhūm MS.,
avadhīm TS. etc., sanem TB., are rare anomalies), that it is convenient to reckon am as ending,
rather than m. But the perfect tense has neither mi nor m; its ending is simply a (sometimes ā:
248 c); or, from ā-roots, āu.
b. The primary middle ending, according to the analogy of the other persons, would be
regularly me. But no tense or mode, at any period of the language, shows any relic whatever of
a m in this person; the primary ending, present as well as perfect, from a-stems and others
alike, is e; and to it corresponds i as secondary ending, which blends with the final of an a-
stem to e. The optative has, however, a instead of i; and in the subjunctive (later imperative)
appears āi for e.
544. Second person. a. In the active, the primary ending is si, which is shortened to s as
secondary; as to the loss of this s after a final radical consonant, see below, 555. But the
perfect and the imperative desert here entirely the analogy of the other forms. The perfect
ending is invariably tha (or thā: 248 c). The imperative is far less regular. The fullest form of
its ending is dhi; which, however, is more often reduced to hi; and in the great majority of
verbs (including all a-stems, at every period of the language) no ending is present, but the bare
stem stands as personal form. In a very small class of verbs (722–3), āna is the ending. There
is also an alternative ending tāt; and this is even used sporadically in other persons of the
imperative (see below, 570–1).
b. In the middle voice, the primary ending, both present and perfect, is se. The secondary
stands in no apparent relation to this, being thās; and in the imperative is found only sva (or
svā: 248 c), which in the Veda is not seldom to be read as sua. In the older language, se is
sometimes strengthened to sāi in the subjunctive.
545. Third person. a. The active primary ending is ti; the secondary, tt>t; as to the loss of
the latter after a final radical consonant, see below, 555. But in the imperative appears instead
the peculiar ending tu; and in the perfect no characteristic consonant is present, and the third
person has the same ending as the first.
b. The primary middle ending is te, with ta as corresponding secondary. In the older
language, te is often strengthened to tāi in

the subjunctive. In the perfect, the middle third person has, like the active, the same ending
with the first, namely e simply; and in the older language, the third person present also often
loses the distinctive part of its termination, and comes to coincide in form with the first (and
MS. has aduha for adugdha). To this e perhaps corresponds, as secondary, the i of the aorist
3d pers. passive (842 ff.). The imperative has tām (or, in the Veda, rarely ām) for its ending.
546. Dual: First person. Both in active and in middle, the dual first person is in all its
varieties precisely like the corresponding plural, only with substitution of v for the m of the
latter: thus, vas (no vasi has been found to occur), va, vahe, vahi, vahāi. The person is, of
course, of comparatively rare use, and from the Veda no form in vas, even, is quotable.
547. Second and Third persons. a. In the active, the primary ending of the second person is
thas, and that of the third is tas; and this relation of th to t appears also in the perfect, and
runs through the whole series of middle endings. The perfect endings are primary, but have u
instead of a as vowel; and an a has become so persistently prefixed that their forms have to be
reckoned as athus and atus. The secondary endings exhibit no definable relation to the primary
in these two persons; they are tam and tām; and they are used in the imperative as well.
b. In the middle, a long ā — which, however, with the final a of a-stems becomes e — has
become prefixed to all dual endings of the second and third persons, so as to form an
inseparable part of them (dīdhīthām AV., and jihīthām ÇB., are isolated anomalies). The primary
endings, present and perfect, are āthe and āte; the secondary (and imperative) are āthām and
ātām (or, with stem-final a, ethe etc.).
c. The Rig-Veda has a very few forms in āithe and āite, apparently from ethe and ete with
subjunctive strengthening (they are all detailed below: see 615, 701, 737, 752, 836, 1008,
1043).
548. Plural: First person. a. The earliest form of the active ending is masi, which in the
oldest language is more frequent than the briefer mas (in RV., as five to one; in AV., however,
only as three to four). In the classical Sanskrit, mas is the exclusive primary ending; but the
secondary abbreviated ma belongs also to the perfect and the subjunctive (imperative). In the
Veda, ma often becomes mā (248 c), especially in the perfect.
b. The primary middle ending is mahe. This is lightened in the secondary form to mahi;
and, on the other hand, it is regularly (in the Veda, not invariably) strengthened to mahāi in
the subjunctive (imperative).
549. Second person. a. The active primary ending is tha. The secondary, also imperative,
ending is ta (in the Veda, tā only

once in impv.). But in the perfect any characteristic consonant is wanting, and the ending is
simply a. In the Veda, the syllable na, of problematic origin, is not infrequently added to both
forms of the ending, making thana (rarely thanā) and tana. The forms in which this occurs will
be detailed below, under the different formations; the addition is very rarely made excepting to
persons of the first general conjugation.
b. The middle primary ending is dhve, which belongs to the perfect as well as the present.
In the subjunctive of the older language it is sometimes strengthened to dhvāi. The secondary
(and imperative) ending is dhvam (in RV., once dhva); and dhvāt is once met with in the
imperative (570). In the Veda, the v of all these endings is sometimes to be resolved into u,
and the ending becomes dissyllabic. As to the change of dh of these endings to ḍh, see above,
226 c.
550. Third person. a. The full primary ending is anti in the active, with ante as
corresponding middle. The middle secondary ending is anta, to which should correspond an
active ant; but of the t only altogether questionable traces are left, in the euphonic treatment of
a final n (207); the ending is an. In the imperative, antu and antām take the place of anti and
ante. The initial a of all these endings is like that of am in the 1st sing., disappearing after the
final a of a tense-stem.
b. Moreover, anti, antu, ante, antām, anta are all liable to be weakened by the loss of their
nasal, becoming ati etc. In the active, this weakening takes place only after reduplicated non- a-
stems (and after a few roots which are treated as if reduplicated: 639 ff.); in the middle, it
occurs after all tense-stems save those ending in a.
c. Further, for the secondary active ending an there is a substitute us (or ur: 169 b; the
evidence of the Zend favors the latter form), which is used in the same reduplicating verbs that
change anti to ati etc., and which accordingly appears as a weaker correlative of an. The same
us is also used universally in the perfect, in the optative (not in the subjunctive), in those forms
of the aorist whose stem does not end in a, and in the imperfect of root-stems ending in ā, and
a few others (621).
d. The perfect middle has in all periods of the language the peculiar ending re, and the
optative has the allied ran, in this person. In the Veda, a variety of other endings containing a
r as distinctive consonant are met with: namely, re (and ire) and rate in the present; rata in
the optative (both of present and of aorist); rire in the perfect; ranta, ran, and ram in aorists
(and in an imperfect or two); rām and ratām in the imperative; ra in the imperfect of duh
(MS.). The three rate, ratam, and rata are found even in the later language in one or two
verbs (629).

551. Below are given, for convenience, in tabular form, the schemes of endings as accepted
in the classical or later language: namely, a. the regular primary endings, used in the present
indicative and the future (and the subjunctive in part); and b. the regular secondary endings,
used in the imperfect, the conditional, the aorist, the optative (and the subjunctive in part); and
further, of special schemes, c. the perfect endings (chiefly primary, especially in the middle);
and d. the imperative endings (chiefly secondary). To the so-called imperative endings of the
first person is prefixed the ā which is practically a part of them, though really containing the
mode-sign of the subjunctive from which they are derived.
552. Further, a part of the endings are marked with an accent, and a part are left
unaccented. The latter are those which never, under any circumstances, receive the accent; the
former are accented in considerable classes of verbs, though by no means in all. It will be
noticed that, in general, the unaccented endings are those of the singular active; but the 2d
sing. imkerative has an accented ending; and, on the other hand, the whole series of 1st
persons imperative, active and middle, have unaccented endings (this being a characteristic of
the subjunctive formation which they represent).
553. The schemes of normal endings, then, are as follows:
a. Primary Endings.
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
mi
vás
más
é
váhe
máhe
2
si
thás
thá
sé
ā́the
dhvé
3
ti
tás
ánti, áti
té
ā́te
ánte, áte
b. Secondary Endings.
1
am
vá
má
í, á
váhi
máhi
2
s
tám
tá
thā́s
ā́thām
dhvám
3
t
tā́m
án, ús
tá
ā́tām
ánta, áta, rán
c. Perfect Endings.
1
a
vá
má
é
váhe
máhe
2
tha
áthus
á
sé
ā́the
dhvé
3
a
átus
ús
é
ā́te
ré
d. Imperative Endings.
1
āni
āva
āma
āi
āvahāi
āmahāi
2
dhí, hí, —
tám
tá
svá
ā́thām
dhvám
3
tu
tā́m
ántu, átu
tā́m
ā́tām
ántām, átām
554. In general, the rule is followed that an accented ending, if dissyllabic, is accented on
its first syllable — and the constant union-vowels are regarded, in this respect, as integral parts
of the endings. But the

3d pl. ending ate of the pres. indic. middle has in RV. the accent até in a number of verbs (see
613, 685, 699, 719); and an occasional instance is met with in other endings: thus, mahé (see
719, 735).
555. The secondary endings of the second and third persons singular, as consisting of an
added consonant without vowel, should regularly (150) be lost whenever the root or stem to
which they are to be added itself ends in a consonant. And this rule is in general followed; yet
not without exceptions. Thus:
a. A root ending in a dental mute sometimes drops this final mute instead of the added s in
the second person; and, on the other hand, a root or stem ending in s sometimes drops this s
instead of the added t in the third person – in either case, establishing the ordinary relation of
s and t in these persons, instead of s and s, or t and t. The examples noted are: 2d sing. aves
(to 3d sing. avet), √vid, AB.; 3d sing. akat, √kṛ, ÇB. aghat, √ghas, JB. AÇS.; acakāt, √cakās, RT.;
açāt, √çās, AB. MBh. R.; asrat, √sras, VS.; ahinat, √hiṅs, ÇB. TB. GB. Compare also the s-aorist
forms ayās and srās (146 a), in which the same influence is to be seen; and further, ajāit etc.
(889 a), and precative yāt for yās (837). A similar loss of any other final consonant is
excessively rare; AV. has once abhanas, for -nak, √bhañj. There are also a few cases where a
1st sing. is irregularly modeled after a 3d sing.: thus, atṛṇam (to atṛṇat), √tṛd, KU., acchinam
(to acchinat), √chid, MBh.: compare urther the 1st sing. in m instead of am, 543 a.
b. Again, a union-vowel is sometimes introduced before the ending, either a or i or ī: see
below, 621 b, 631, 819, 880, 1004 a, 1068 a.
c. In a few isolated cases in the older language, this ī is changed to āi: see below, 904 b,
936, 1068 a.
556. The changes of form which roots and stems undergo in their combinations with these
endings will be pointed out in detail below, under the various formations. Here may be simply
mentioned in advance, as by far the most important among them, a distinction of stronger and
weaker form of stem in large classes of verbs, standing in relation with the accent – the stem
being of stronger form when the accent falls upon it, or before an accentless ending, and of
weaker form when the accent is on the ending.
a. Of the endings marked as accented in the scheme, the ta of 2d pl. is not infrequently in
the Veda treated as unaccented, the tone resting on the stem, which is strengthened. Much less
often, the tam of 2d du. is treated in the same way; other endings, only sporadically. Details
are given under the various formations below.
Subjunctive Mode.
557. Of the subjunctive mode (as was pointed out above) only fragments are left in the later
or classical language: namely, in the

so-called first persons imperative, and in the use (579) of the imperfect and aorist persons
without augment after mā́ prohibitive. In the oldest period, however, it was a very frequent
formation, being three or four times as common as the optative in the Rig-Veda, and nearly the
same in the Atharvan; but already in the Brāhmaṇas it becomes comparatively rare. Its varieties
of form are considerable, and sometimes perplexing.
558. In its normal and regular formation, a special mode-stem is made for the subjunctive
by adding to the tense-stem an a – which combines with a final a of the tense-stem to ā. The
accent rests upon the tense-stem, which accordingly has the strong form. Thus, from the strong
present-stem doh (√duh) is made the subjunctive-stem dóha; from juhó (√hu), juháva; from yunáj
(√yuj), yunája; from sunó (√su), sunáva; from bháva (√bhū), bhávā; from tudá (√tud), tudā́; from
ucyá (pass., √vac), ucyā́; and so on.
559. The stem thus formed is inflected in general as an a-stem would be inflected in the
indicative, with constant accent, and ā for a before the endings of the first person (733 i) – but
with the following peculiarities as to ending etc.:
560. a. In the active, the 1st sing. has ni as ending: thus, dóhāni, yunájāni, bhávāni. But in
the Rig-Veda sometimes ā simply: thus, áyā, brávā.
b. In 1st du., 1st pl., and 3d pl., the endings are the secondary: thus, dóhāva, dóhāma,
dóhan; bhávāva, bhávāma, bhávān.
c. In 2d and 3d du. and 2d pl., the endings are primary: thus, dóhathas, dóhatas, dóhatha;
bhávāthas, bhávātas, bhávātha.
d. In 2d and 3d sing., the endings are either primary or secondary: thus, dóhasi or dóhas,
dóhati or dóhat; bhávāsi or bhávās, bhávāti or bhávāt.
e. Occasionally, forms with double mode-sign ā (by assimilation to the more numerous
subjunctives from tense-stems in a) are met with from non- a-stems: thus, ásātha from as; áyās,
áyāt, áyān from e (√i).
561. In the middle, forms with secondary instead of primary endings are very rare, being
found only in the 3d pl. (where they are more frequent than the primary), and in a case or two
of the 3d sing. (and AB. has once asyāthās).
a. The striking peculiarity of subjunctive middle inflection is the frequent strengthening of e
to āi in the endings. This is less general in the very earliest language than later. In 1st sing., āi
alone is found as ending, even in RV.; and in 1st du. also (of rare occurrence), only āvahāi is
met with. In 1st pl., āmahāi prevails in RV. and AV. ( āmahe is found a few times), and is alone
known later. In 2d sing., sāi for se does not occur in RV., but is the only form in AV. and the
Brāhmaṇas. In 3d sing., tāi for te occurs once in RV., and is the predominant form

in AV., and the only one later. In 2d pl., dhvāi for dhve is found in one word in RV., and a few
times in the Brāhmaṇas. In 3d pl., ntāi for nte is the Brāhmaṇa form (of far from frequent
occurrence); it occurs neither in RV. nor AV. No such dual endings as thāi and tāi, for the and
te, are anywhere found; but RV. has in a few words (nine: above, 547 c) āithe and āite, which
appear to be a like subjunctive strengthening of ethe and ete (although found in one indicative
form, kṛṇvāite). Before the āi-endings, the vowel is regularly long ā; but antāi instead of āntāi
is two or three times met with, and once or twice (TS. AB.) atāi for ātāi.
562. The subjunctive endings, then, in combination with the subjunctive mode-sign, are as
follows:
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
āni
āva
āma
āi
āvahāi
āvahe
āmahāi
āmahe
2
asi
as
athas
atha
ase
āsāi
āithe
adhve
ādhvāi
3
ati
at
atas
an
ate
ātāi
āite
ante, anta
āntāi
a. And in further combination with final a of a tense-stem, the initial a of all these endings
becomes ā: thus, for example, in 2d pers., āsi or ās, āthas, ātha, āse, ādhve.
563. Besides this proper subjunctive, with mode-sign, In its triple form — with primary, with
strengthened primary, and with secondary endings — the name of subjunctive, in the forms
"imperfect subjunctive" and "improper subjunctive", has been also given to the indicative forms
of imperfect and aorist when used, with the augment omitted, in a modal sense (below, 587):
such use being quite common in RV., but rapidly dying out, so that in the Brāhmaṇa language
and later it is hardly met with except after mā prohibitive.
a. As to the general uses of the subjunctive, see below, 574 ff.
Optative Mode.
564. a. As has been already pointed out, the optative is of comparatively rare occurrence in
the language of the Vedas; but it gains rapidly in frequency, and already in the Brāhmaṇas
greatly outnumbers the subjunctive, and still later comes almost entirely to take its place.
b. Its mode of formation is the same in all periods of the language.
565. a. The optative mode-sign is in the active voice a different one, according as it is
added to a tense-stem ending in a, or

to one ending in some other final. In the latter case, it is yā́, accented; this yā is appended to
the weaker form of the tense-stem, and takes the regular series of secondary endings, with, in
3d plur., us instead of an, and loss of the ā before it. After an a-stem, it is ī, unaccented; this ī
blends with the final a to e (which then is accented or not according to the accent of the a);
and the e is maintained unchanged before a vowel-ending ( am, us), by means of an interposed
euphonic y.
b. In the middle voice, the mode-sign is ī throughout, and takes the secondary endings, with
a in 1st sing., and ran in 3d pl. After an a-stem, the rules as to its combination to e, the accent
of the latter, and its retention before a vowel-ending with interposition of a y, are the same as
in the active. After any other final, the weaker form of stem is taken, and the accent is on the
ending (except in one class of verbs, where it falls upon the tense-stem: see 645); and the ī (as
when combined to e) takes an inserted y before the vowel-endings ( a, āthām, ātām).
c. It is, of course, impossible to tell from the form whether i or ī is combined with the final
of an a-stem to e; but no good reason appears to exist for assuming i, rather than the ī which
shows itself in the other class of stems in the middle voice.
566. The combined mode-sign and endings of the optative, then, are as follows, in their
double form, for a-stems and for others:
a. for non-a-stems.
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
yā́m
yā́va
yā́ma
īyá
īváhi
īmáhi
2
yā́s
yā́tam
yā́ta
īthā́s
īyā́thām
īdhvám
3
yā́t
yā́tām
yús
ītá
īyā́tām
īrán
b. combined with the final of a-stems.
1
eyam
eva
ema
eya
evahi
emahi
2
es
etam
eta
ethās
eyāthām
edhvam
3
et
etām
eyus
eta
eyātām
eran
c. The yā is in the Veda not seldom resolved into iā.
d. The contracted sanem, for saneyam, is found in TB. and Āpast. Certain Vedic 3d pl.
middle forms in rata will be mentioned below, under the various formations.
567. Precative. Precative forms are such as have a sibilant inserted between the optative-
sign and the ending. They are made almost only from the aorist stems, and, though allowed by
the grammarians to be formed from every root — the active precative from the simple aorist,
the middle from the sibilant aorist — are

practically of rare occurrence at every period of the language, and especially later.
a. The inserted s runs in the active through the whole series of persons; in the middle, it is
allowed only in the 2d and 3d persons sing. and du. and the 2d pl., and is quotable only for
the 2d and 3d sing. In the 2d sing. act., the precative form, by reason of the necessary loss of
the added s, is not distinguishable from the simple optative; in the 3d sing. act., the same is
the case in the later language, which (compare 555 a) saves the personal ending t instead of
the precative-sign s; but the RV. usually, and the other Vedic texts to some extent, have the
proper ending yās (for yāst). As to ḍh in the 2d pl. mid., see 226 c.
b. The accent is as in the simple optative.
568. The precative endings, then, accepted in the later language (including, in brackets,
those which are identical with the simple optative), are as follows:
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
yā́sam
yā́sva
yā́sma
[īyá]
[īváhi]
[īmáhi]
2
[yā́s]
yā́stam
yā́sta
īṣṭhā́s
īyā́sthām
īḍhvam
3
[yā́t]
yā́stām
yā́sus
īṣṭá
īyā́stām
[īrán]
a. Respecting the precative, see further 921 ff.
b. As to the general uses of the optative, see below, 573 ff.
Imperative Mode.
569. The imperative has no mode-sign; it is made by adding its own endings directly to the
tense-stem, just as the other endings are added to form the indicative tenses.
a. Hence, in 2d and 3d du. and 2d pl., its forms are indistinguishable from those of the
augment-preterit from the same stem with its augment omitted.
b. The rules as to the use of the different endings — especially in 2d sing., where the
variety is considerable — will be given below, in connection with the various tense-systems. The
ending tāt, however, has so much that is peculiar in its use that it calls for a little explanation
here.
570. The Imperative in tāt. An imperative form, usually having the value of a 2d pers. sing.,
but sometimes also of other persons and numbers, is made by adding tāt to a present tense-
stem — in its weak form, if it have a distinction of strong and weak form.
a. Examples are: brūtāt, hatāt, vittā́t; pipṛtāt, jahītāt, dhattā́t; kṛṇutāt, kurutāt; gṛhṇītāt,
jānītā́t; ávatāt, rákṣatāt, vasatāt; viçatāt, sṛjatāt; asyatāt, naçyatāt, chyatāt; kriyatāt;

gamayatāt, cyāvayatāt, vārayatāt; īpsatāt; jāgṛtāt. No examples have been found from a nasal-
class verb (690), nor any other than those here given from a passive, intensive, or desiderative.
The few accented cases indicate that the formation follows the general rule for one made with
an accented ending (552).
b. The imperative in tāt is not a very rare formation in the older language, being made (in
V., B., and S.) from about fifty roots, and in toward a hundred and fifty occurrences. Later, it is
very unusual: thus, only a single example has been noted in MBh., and one in R.; and
correspondingly few in yet more modern texts.
571. As regards its meaning, this form appears to have prevailingly in the Brāhmaṇas, and
traceably but much less distinctly in the Vedic texts, a specific tense-value added to its mode-
value — as signifying, namely, an injunction to be carried out at a later time than the present:
it is (like the Latin forms in to and tote) a posterior or future imperative.
a. Examples are: ihāi ’vá mā tíṣṭhantam abhyèhī́ ’ti brūhi tā́ṁ tú na ā́gatām pratiprábrūtāt
(ÇB.) say to her "come to me as I stand just here," and [afterward] announce her to us as
having come; yád ūrdhvás tíṣṭhā dráviṇe ’há dhattāt  (RV.) when thou shalt stand upright, [then]
bestow riches here (and similarly in many cases); utkū́lam udvahó bhavo ’dúhya práti dhāvatāt
(AV.) be a carrier up the ascent; after having carried up, run back again ; vánaspátir ádhi tvā
sthāsyati tásya vittāt (TS.) the tree will ascend thee, [then] take note of it .
b. Examples of its use as other than 2d sing. are as follows: 1st sing., āvyuṣáṁ jāgṛtād
ahám (AV.; only case) let me watch till daybreak; as 3d sing., púnar mā́ ”viçatād rayíḥ (TS.) let
wealth come again to me, ayáṁ tyásya rā́jā mūrdhā́naṁ ví pātayatāt  (ÇB.) the king here shall
make his head fly off; as 2d du., nā́satyāv abruvan devā́ḥ púnar ā́ vahatād íti  (RV.) the gods
said to the two Açvins "bring them back again"; as 2d pl., ā́paḥ ... devéṣu naḥ sukṛ́to brūtāt
(TS.) ye waters, announce us to the gods as well-doers . In the later language, the prevailing
value appears to be that of a 3d sing.: thus, bhavān prasādaṁ kurutāt (MBh.) may your worship
do the favor, enam bhavān abhirakṣatāt (DKC.) let your excellency protect him.
c. According to the native grammarians, the imperative in tāt is to be used with a
benedictive implication. No instance of such use appears to be quotable.
d. In a certain passage repeated several times in different Brāhmaṇas and Sūtras, and
containing a number of forms in tāt used as 2d pl., vārayadhvāt is read instead of vārayatāt in
some of the texts (K. AB. AÇS. ÇÇS.). No other occurrence of the ending dhvāt has been
anywhere noted.

Uses of the Modes.
572. Of the three modes, the imperative is the one most distinct and limited in office, and
most unchanged in use throughout the whole history of the language. It signifies a command or
injunction — an attempt at the exercise of the speaker's will upon some one or something
outside of himself.
a. This, however (in Sanskrit as in other languages), is by no means always of the same
force; the command shades off into a demand, an exhortation, an entreaty, an expression of
earnest desire. The imperative also sometimes signifies an assumption or concession; and
occasionally, by pregnant construction, it becomes the expression of something conditional or
contingent; but it does not acquire any regular use in dependent-clause-making.
b. The imperative is now and then used in an interrogative sentence: thus, bravīhi ko ‘dyāi
’va mayā viyujyatām (R.) speak! who shall now be separated by me ? katham ete guṇavantaḥ
kriyantām (H.) how are they to be made virtuous?  kasmāi piṇḍaḥ pradīyatām (Vet.) to whom
shall the offering be given?
573. The optative appears to have as its primary office the expression of wish or desire; in
the oldest language, its prevailing use in independent clauses is that to which the name
"optative" properly belongs.
a. But the expression of desire, on the one hand, passes naturally over into that of request
or entreaty, so that the optative becomes a softened imperative; and, on the other hand, it
comes to signify what is generally desirable or proper, what should or ought to be, and so
becomes the mode of prescription; or, yet again, it is weakened into signifying what may or can
be, what is likely or usual, and so becomes at last a softened statement of what is.
b. Further, the optative in dependent clauses, with relative pronouns and conjunctions,
becomes a regular means of expression of the conditional and contingent, in a wide and
increasing variety of uses.
c. The so-called precative forms (567) are ordinarily used in the proper optative sense. But
in the later language they are occasionally met with in the other uses of the optative: thus, na
hi prapaçyāmi mamā ’panudyād yac chokam (Bh G.) for I do not perceive what should dispel
my grief; yad bhūyāsur vibhūtayaḥ (BhP.) that there should be changes . Also rarely with mā:
see 579 b.

574. The subjunctive, as has been pointed out, becomes nearly extinct at an early period in
the history of the language; there are left of it in classical usage only two relics: the use of its
first persons in an imperative sense, or to signify a necessity or obligation resting on the
speaker, or a peremptory intention on his part; and the use of unaugmented forms (579), with
the negative particle मा mā́, in a prohibitive or negative imperative sense.
a. And the general value of the subjunctive from the beginning was what these relics would
seem to indicate; its fundamental meaning is perhaps that of requisition, less peremptory than
the imperative, more so than the optative. But this meaning is liable to the same modifications
and transitions with that of the optative; and subjunctive and optative run closely parallel with
one another in the oldest language in their use in independent clauses, and are hardly
distinguishable in dependent. And instead of their being (as in Greek) both maintained in use,
and endowed with nicer and more distinctive values, the subjunctive gradually disappears, and
the optative assumes alone the offices formerly shared by both.
575. The difference, then, between imperative and subjunctive and optative, in their
fundamental and most characteristic uses, is one of degree: command, requisition, wish; and no
sharp line of division exists between them; they are more or less exchangeable with one
another, and combinable in coördinate clauses.
a. Thus, in AV., we have in impv.: çatáṁ jīva çarádaḥ do thou live a hundred autumns ;
ubhāú tāú jīvatāṁ jarádaṣṭī let them both live to attain old age; — in subj., adyá jīvāni let me
live this day; çatáṁ jīvāti çarádaḥ he shall live a hundred autumns;  — in opt., jī́vema çarádāṁ
çatā́ni may we live hundreds of autumns ; sárvam ā́yur jīvyāsam (prec.) I would fain live out my
whole term of life. Here the modes would be interchangeable with a hardly perceptible change
of meaning.
b. Examples, again, of different modes in coördinate construction are: iyám agne nā́rī pátiṁ
videṣṭa ... súvānā putrā́n máhiṣī bhavāti gatvā́ pátiṁ subhágā ví rājatu (AV.) may this woman, O
Agni! find a spouse; giving birth to sons she shall become a chieftainess; having attained a
spouse let her rule in happiness; gopāyá naḥ svastáye prabúdhe naḥ púnar dadaḥ (TS.) watch
over us for

our welfare; grant unto us to wake again ; syā́n naḥ sūnúḥ ... sā́ te sumatír bhūtv asmé  (RV.)
may there be to us a son; let that favor of thine be ours . It is not very seldom the case that
versions of the same passage in different texts show different modes as various readings.
c. There is, in fact, nothing in the earliest employment of these modes to prove that they
might not all be specialized uses of forms originally equivalent — having, for instance, a general
future meaning.
576. As examples of the less characteristic use of subjunctive and optative in the older
language, in independent clauses, may be quoted the following: ā́ ghā tā́ gacchān úttarā yugā́ni
(RV.) those later ages will doubtless come ; yád ... na marā íti mányase  (RV.) if thou thinkest "I
shall not die"; ná tā́ naçanti ná dabhāti táskaraḥ (RV.) they do not become lost; no thief can
harm them; kásmāi devā́ya havíṣā vidhema (RV.) to what god shall we offer oblation?  agnínā
rayím açnavat ... divé-dive (RV.) by Agni one may gain wealth every day ; utāí ’nām brahmáṇe
dadyāt táthā syonā́ çivā́ syāt (AV.) one should give her, however, to a Brahman; in that case
she will be propitious and favorable; áhar-ahar dadyāt (ÇB.) one should give every day.
577. The uses of the optative in the later language are of the utmost variety, covering the
whole field occupied jointly by the two modes in earlier time. A few examples from a single text
(MBh.) 
will 
be 
enough 
to 
illustrate 
them: ucchiṣṭaṁ nāi ’va bhuñjīyaṁ na kuryām
pādadhāvanam I will not eat of the remnant of the sacrifice, I will not perform the foot-lavation ;
jñātīn vrajet let her go to her relatives ; nāi ’vaṁ sā karhicit kuryāt  she should not act thus at
any time; kathaṁ vidyāṁ nalaṁ nṛpam how can I know king Nala?  utsarge saṁçayaḥ syāt tu
vindetā ’pi sukhaṁ kvacit but in case of her abandonment there may be a chance; she may also
find happiness somewhere; kathaṁ vāso vikarteyaṁ na ca budhyeta me priyā how can I cut off
the garment and my beloved not wake?
578. The later use of the first persons subjunctive as so-called imperative involves no change
of construction from former time, but only restriction to a single kind of use: thus, dīvyāva let
us two play; kiṁ karavāṇi te what shall I do for thee?
579. The imperative negative, or prohibitive, is from the earliest period of the language
regularly and usually expressed by the particle mā́ with an augmentless past form, prevailingly
aorist.
a. Thus, prá pata mé ’há raṁsthāḥ (AV.) fly away, do not stay here ; dviṣáṅç ca máhyaṁ
radhyatu mā́ cā ’háṁ dviṣaté radham (AV.) both let my foe be subject to me, and let me not be
subject to my foe; urv àçyām ábhayaṁ jyótir indra mā́ no dīrghā́ abhí naçan tamisrā́ḥ (RV.) I
would win broad fearless light, O Indra; let not the long darknesses come upon us; mā́ na ā́yuḥ
prá moṣīḥ (RV.) do not

steal away our life; samāçvasihi mā çucaḥ (MBh.) be comforted; do not grieve;  mā bhāiṣīḥ or
bhāiḥ (MBh. R.) do not be afraid; mā bhūt kālasya paryayaḥ (R.) let not a change of time take
place. Examples with the imperfect are: mā́ bibher ná mariṣyasi (RV.) do not fear; thou wilt not
die; mā́ smāi ’tā́nt sákhīn kuruthāḥ (AV.) do not make friends of them;  mā putram anutapyathāḥ
(MBh.) do not sorrow for thy son.  The relation of the imperfect to the aorist construction, in
point of frequency, is in RV. about as one to five, in AV. still less, or about one to six; and
though instances of the imperfect are quotable from all the older texts, they are exceptional
and infrequent; while in the epics and later they become extremely rare.
b. A single optative, bhujema, is used prohibitively with mā́ in RV.; the older language
presents no other example, and the construction is very rare also later. In an example or two,
also, the precative (bhūyāt, R. Pañc.) follows mā.
c. The RV. has once apparently mā́ with an imperative; but the passage is probably corrupt.
No other such case is met with in the older language (unless sṛpa. TA. i. 14; doubtless a bad
reading for sṛpas); but in the epics and later the construction begins to appear, and becomes
an ordinary form of prohibition: thus, mā prayacche ”çvare dhanam  (H.) do not bestow wealth
on a lord; sakhi māi ’vaṁ vada (Vet.) friend, do not speak thus.
d. The ÇB. (xi. 5. 1 1) appears to offer a single example of a true subjunctive with mā, ní
padyāsāi; there is perhaps something wrong about the reading.
e. In the epics and later, an aorist form not deprived of augment is occasionally met with
after mā: thus, mā tvāṁ kālo ‘tyagāt (MBh.) let not the time pass thee;  mā vālipatham anv
agāḥ (R.) do not follow Vāli's road.  But the same anomaly occurs also two or three times in the
older language: thus, vyàpaptat (ÇB.), agās (TA.), anaçat (KS.).
580. But the use also of the optative with ná not in a prohibitive sense appears in the Veda,
and becomes later a familiar construction: thus, ná riṣyema kadā́ caná (RV.) may we suffer no
harm at any time; ná cā ’tisṛjén ná juhuyāt (AV.) and if he do not grant permission, let him not
sacrifice; tád u táthā ná kuryāt  (ÇB.) but he must not do that so; na divā çayīta (ÇGS.) let him
not sleep by day; na tvāṁ vidyur janāḥ (MBh.) let not people know thee. This in the later
language is the correlative of the prescriptive optative, and both are extremely common; so that
in a text of prescriptive character the optative forms may come to outnumber the indicative and
imperative together (as is the case, for example, in Manu).
581. In all dependent constructions, it is still harder even in the oldest language to establish
a definite distinction between subjunctive and optative; a method of use of either is scarcely to
be found to which the other does not furnish a practical equivalent —

and then, in the later language, such uses are represented by the optative alone. A few
examples will be sufficient to illustrate this:
a. After relative pronouns and conjunctions in general: yā́ vyūṣúr yā́ç ca nūnáṁ vyucchā́n
(RV.) which have shone forth [hitherto], and which shall hereafter shine forth ; yó ‘to jā́yātā
asmā́kaṁ sá éko ‘sat (TS.) whoever shall be born of her, let him be one of us ; yó vāí tā́n vidyā́t
pratyákṣaṁ sá brahmā́ véditā syāt (AV.) whoever shall know them face to face, he may pass for
a knowing priest; putrā́ṇāṁ ... jātā́nāṁ janáyāç ca yā́n  (AV.) of sons born and whom thou
mayest bear; yásya ... átithir gṛhā́n āgácchet  (AV.) to whosesoever house he may come as guest ;
yatamáthā kāmáyeta táthā kuryāt (ÇB.) in whatever way he may choose, so may he do it ; yárhi
hótā yájamānasya nā́ma gṛhṇīyā́t tárhi brūyāt (TS.) when the sacrificing priest shall name the
name of the offerer, then he may speak; svarūpaṁ yadā draṣṭum icchethāḥ (MBh.) when thou
shalt desire to see thine own form.
b. In more distinctly conditional constructions: yájāma devā́n yádi çaknávāma (RV.) we will
offer to the gods if we shall be able; yád agne syā́m aháṁ tváṁ tváṁ vā ghā syā́ aháṁ syúṣ ṭe
satyā́ ihā́ ”çíṣaḥ (RV.) if I were thou, Agni, or if thou wert I, thy wishes should be realized on
the spot; yó dyā́m atisárpāt parástān ná sá mucyātāi váruṇasya rā́jñaḥ (AV.) though one steal
far away beyond the sky, he shall not escape king Varuna; yád ánāçvān upaváset kṣódhukaḥ
syād yád açnīyā́d rudrò ‘sya paçū́n abhí manyeta (TS.) if he should continue without eating, he
would starve; if he should eat, Rudra would attack his cattle; prārthayed yadi māṁ kaçcid
daṇḍyaḥ sa me pumān bhavet (MBh.) if any man soever should desire me, he should suffer
punishment. These and the like constructions, with the optative, are very common in the
Brāhmaṇas and later.
c. In final clauses: yáthā ’háṁ çatruhó ‘sāni (AV.) that I may be a slayer of my enemies ;
gṛṇānā́ yáthā píbātho ándhaḥ (RV.) that being praised with song ye may drink the draught ; urāú
yáthā táva çárman mádema (RV.) in order that we rejoice in thy wide protection ; úpa jānīta
yáthe ‘yám púnar āgácchet (ÇB.) contrive that she come back again; kṛpāṁ kuryād yathā mayi
(MBh.) so that he may take pity on me . This is in the Veda one of the most frequent uses of
the subjunctive; and in its correlative negative form, with néd in order that not or lest (always
followed by an accented verb), it continues not rare in the Brāhmaṇas.
d. The indicative is also very commonly used in final clauses after yathā: thus, yáthā ’yáṁ
púruṣo ‘ntárikṣam anucárati (ÇB.) in order that this man may traverse the atmosphere ; yathā
na vighnaḥ kriyate (R.) so that no hindrance may arise ; yathā ’yaṁ naçyati tathā vidheyam (H.)
it must be so managed that he perish .

e. With the conditional use of subjunctive and optative is farther to be compared that of the
so-called conditional tense: see below, 950.
f. As is indicated by many of the examples given above, it is usual in a conditional sentence,
containing protasis and apodosis, to employ always the same mode, whether subjunctive or
optative (or conditional), in each of the two clauses. For the older language, this is a rule well-
nigh or quite without exception.
582. No distinction of meaning has been established between the modes of the present-
system and those (in the older language) of the perfect and aorist-systems.
Participles.
583. Participles, active and middle, are made from all the tense-stems — except the
periphrastic future, and, in the later language, the aorist (and aorist participles are rare from
the beginning).
a. The participles unconnected with the tense-systems are treated in chap. XIII. (952 ff.).
584. The general participial endings are अ् ant (weak form अत् at; fem. अी antī or अती atī:
see above, 449) for the active, and आन āna (fem. आना ānā) for the middle. But —
a. After a tense-stem ending in a, the active participial suffix is virtually nt, one of the two
a's being lost in the combination of stem-final and suffix.
b. After a tense-stem ending in a, the middle participial suffix is māna instead of āna. But
there are occasional exceptions to the rule as to the use of māna and āna respectively, which
will be pointed out in connection with the various formations below. Such exceptions are
especially frequent in the causative: see 1043 f.
c. The perfect has in the active the peculiar suffix vāṅs (weakest form uṣ, middle form vat;
fem, uṣī: see, for the inflection of this participle, above, 458 ff.).
d. For details, as to form of stem etc., and for special exceptions, see the following
chapters.
Augment.
585. The augment is a short अ a, prefixed to a tense-stem — and, if the latter begin with a
vowel, combining with that vowel irregularly into the heavier or vṛddhi diphthong

(136 a). It is always (without any exception) the accented element in the verbal form of which
it makes a part.
a. In the Veda, the augment is in a few forms long ā: thus, ā́naṭ, ā́var, āvṛṇi, ā́vṛṇak,
āvidhyat, āyunak, ā́yukta, ā́yukṣātām, ā́riṇak, ā́rāik and yás ta ā́vidhat, RV. ii. 1. 7, 9?).
586. The augment is a sign of past time. And an augment-preterit is made from each of the
tense-stems from which the system of conjugation is derived: namely, the imperfect, from the
present-stem; the pluperfect (in the Veda only), from the perfect-stem; the conditional, from the
future-stem; while in the aorist such a preterit stands without any corresponding present
indicative.
587. In the early language, especially in the RV., the occurrence of forms identical with
those of augment-tenses save for the lack of an augment is quite frequent. Such forms lose in
general, along with the augment, the specific character of the tenses to which they belong; and
they are then employed in part non-modally, with either a present or a past sense; and in part
modally, with either a subjunctive or an optative sense — especially often and regularly after
mā prohibitive (579); and this last mentioned use comes down also into the later language.
a. In RV., the augmentless forms are more than half as common as the augmented (about
2000 and 3300), and are made from the present, perfect, and aorist-systems, but considerably
over half from the aorist. Their non-modal and modal uses are of nearly equal frequency. The
tense value of the non-modally used forms is more often past than present. Of the modally used
forms, nearly a third are construed with mā prohibitive; the rest have twice as often an
optative as a proper subjunctive value.
b. In AV., the numerical relations are very different. The augmentless forms are less than a
third as many as the augmented (about 475 to 1450), and are prevailingly (more than four
fifths) aoristic. The non-modal uses are only a tenth of the modal. Of the modally used forms,
about four fifths are construed with mā prohibitive; the rest are chiefly optative in value. Then,
in the language of the Brāhmaṇas (not including the mantra-material which they contain), the
loss of augment is, save in occasional sporadic cases, restricted to the prohibitive construction
with mā; and the same continues to be the case later.
c. The accentuation of the augmentless forms is throughout in accordance with that of
unaugmented tenses of similar formation. Examples will be given below, under the various
tenses.
d. Besides the augmentless aorist-forms with mā prohibitive, there are also found
occasionally in the later language augmentless imperfect-forms (very rarely aorist-forms), which
have the same value as if they were augmented, and are for the most part examples of
metrical license. They are especially frequent in the epics (whence some scores of them are
quotable).

Reduplication.
588. The derivation of conjugational and declensional stems from roots by reduplication,
either alone or along with other formative elements, has been already spoken of (259), and the
formations in which reduplication appears have been specified: they are, in primary verb-
inflection, the present (of a certain class of verbs), the perfect (of nearly all), and the aorist (of
a large number); and the intensive and desiderative secondary conjugations contain in their
stems the same element.
589. The general principle of reduplication is the prefixion to a root of a part of itself
repeated — if it begin with consonants, the initial consonant and the vowel; if it begin with a
vowel, that vowel, either alone or with a following consonant. The varieties of detail, however,
are very considerable. Thus, especially, as regards the vowel, which in present and perfect and
desiderative is regularly shorter and lighter in the reduplication than in the root-syllable, in
aorist is longer, and in intensive is strengthened. The differences as regards an initial
consonant are less, and chiefly confined to the intensive; for the others, certain general rules
may be here stated, all further details being left to be given in connection with the account of
the separate formations.
590. The consonant of the reduplicating syllable is in general the first consonant of the root:
thus, पछ paprach from √छ prach; िशि çiçri from √ि çri; बुबुध् bubudh from √बुध्. But —
a. A non-aspirate is substituted in reduplication for an aspirate: thus, दधा dadhā from √धा;
िबभृ bibhṛ from √भृ bhṛ.
b. A palatal is substituted for a guttural or for  h:

thus, च cakṛ from √ kṛ ; िचिख cikhid from √िख khid; जभ् jagrabh from √भ् grabh; ज jahṛ
from √ hṛ.
c. The occasional reversion, on the other hand, of a palatal in the radical syllable to guttural
form has been noticed above (216 l).
d. Of two initial consonants, the second, if it be a non-nasal mute preceded by a sibilant, is
repeated instead of the first: thus, तृ tasṭr from √ृ stṛ; ता tasthā from √ा sthā; च
caskand from √ skand; चखल् caskhal from √खल् skhal; चुुत् cuçcut from √ुत् çcut; पृध्
paspṛdh from √ृध् spṛdh; पुट pusphuṭ from √ट sphuṭ: — but सा sasnā from √ा snā; सृ
sasmṛ from √ृ smṛ; सुु susru from √ु sru; िशिष् çiçliṣ from √िष् çliṣ.
Accent of the Verb.
591. The statements which have been made above, and those which will be made below, as
to the accent of verbal forms, apply to those cases in which the verb is actually accented.
a. But, according to the grammarians, and according to the invariable practice in
accentuated texts, the verb is in the majority of its occurrences unaccented or toneless.
b. That is to say, of course, the verb in its proper forms, its personal or so-called finite
forms. The verbal nouns and adjectives, or the infinitives and participles, are subject to
precisely the same laws of accent as other nouns and adjectives.
592. The general rule, covering most of the cases, is this: The verb in an independent
clause is unaccented, unless it stand at the beginning of the clause — or also, in metrical text,
at the beginning of a pāda.
a. For the accent of the verb, as well as for that of the vocative case (above, 314 c), the
beginning of a pāda counts as that of a sentence, whatever be the logical connection of the
pāda with what precedes it.
b. Examples of the unaccented verb are: agním īḍe puróhitam Agni I praise, the house-
priest; sá íd devéṣu gacchati that, truly, goes to the gods; ágne sūpāyanó bhava O Agni, be
easy of access; idám indra çṛṇuhi somapa this, O Indra, soma-drinker, hear; námas te rudra
kṛṇmaḥ homage to thee, Rudra, we offer;  yájamānasya paçū́n pāhi the sacrificer's cattle protect
thou.
c. Hence, there are two principal situations in which the verb retains its accent:

593. First, the verb is accented when it stands at the beginning of a clause — or, in verse,
of a pāda.
a. Examples of the verb accented at the head of the sentence are, in prose, çúndhadhvaṁ
dāívyāya kármaṇe be pure for the divine ceremony; āpnótī ’máṁ lokám he wins this world; in
verse, where the head of the sentence is also that of the pāda, syā́mé ’d índrasya çármaṇi  may
we be in Indra's protection; darçáya mā yātudhā́nān show me the sorcerers; gámad vā́jebhir ā́
sá naḥ may he come with good things to us ; — in verse, where the head of the clause is within
the pāda, téṣām pāhi çrudhī́ hávam  drink of them, hear our call ; sástu mātā́ sástu pitā́ sástu
çvā́ sástu viçpátiḥ let the mother sleep, let the father sleep, let the dog sleep, let the master
sleep; víçvakarman námas te pāhy àsmā́n  Viçvakarman, homage to thee; protect us! yuvā́m ...
rā́jña ūce duhitā́ pṛcché vāṁ narā the king's daughter said to you "I pray you, ye men" ; vayáṁ
te váya indra viddhí ṣu ṇaḥ prá bharāmahe we offer thee, Indra, strengthening; take note of us.
b. Examples of the verb accented at the head of the pāda when this is not the head of the
sentence are: áthā te ántamānāṁ vidyā́ma sumatīnā́m so may we enjoy thy most intimate
favors; dhātā́ ’syā́ agrúvāi pátiṁ dádhātu pratikāmyàm  Dhātar bestow upon this girl a husband
according to her wish; yātudhānasya somapa jahí prajā́m slay, Soma-drinker, the progeny of the
sorcerer.
594. Certain special cases under this head are as follows:
a. As a vocative forms no syntactical part of the sentence to which it is attached, but is
only an external appendage to it, a verb following an initial vocative, or more than one, is
accented, as if it were itself initial in the clause or pāda: thus, ā́çrutkarṇa çrudhī́ hávam O thou
of listening ears, hear our call! sī́te vándāmahe tvā O Sītā, we reverence thee; víçve devā
vásavo rákṣate ’mám all ye gods, ye Vasus, protect this man;  utā́ ”gaç cakrúṣaṁ devā dévā
jīváyathā púnaḥ likewise him, O gods, who has committed crime, ye gods, ye make to live
again.
b. If more than one verb follow a word or words syntactically connected with them all, only
the first loses its accent, the others being treated as if they were initial verbs in separate
clauses, with the same adjuncts understood: thus, taráṇir íj jayati kṣéti púṣyati successful he
conquers, rules, thrives; amítrān ... párāca indra prá mṛṇā jahī́ ca  our foes, Indra, drive far
away and slay; asmábhyaṁ jeṣi yótsi ca for us conquer and fight; ágnīṣomā havíṣaḥ
prásthitasya vītáṁ háryataṁ vṛṣaṇā juṣéthām O Agni and Soma, of the oblation set forth
partake, enjoy, ye mighty ones, take pleasure.
c. In like manner (but much less often), an adjunct, as subject or object, standing between
two verbs and logically belonging to both, is reckoned to the first alone, and the second has
the initial accent: thus, jahí prajā́ṁ náyasva ca slay the progeny, and bring [it] hither ; çṛṇótu
naḥ subhágā bódhatu tmánā may the blessed one hear us, [and may she] kindly regard [us].

d. It has even come to be a formal rule that a verb immediately following another verb is
accented: thus, sá yá etám evám upā́ste pūryáte prajáyā paçúbhiḥ (ÇB.) whoever worships him
thus is filled with offspring and cattle.
595. Second, the verb is accented, whatever its position, in a dependent clause.
a. The dependency of a clause is in the very great majority of cases conditioned by the
relative pronoun ya, or one of its derivatives or compounds. Thus: yáṁ yajñám paribhū́r ási
what offering thou protectest; ó té yanti yé aparī́ṣu páçyān  they are coming who shall behold
her hereafter; sahá yán me ásti téna along with that which is mine;  yátra naḥ pū́rve pitáraḥ
pareyúḥ whither our fathers of old departed ; adyā́ murīya yádi yātudhā́no ásmi  let me die on
the spot, if I am a sorcerer; yáthā́ ’hāny anupūrvám bhávanti as days follow one another in
order; yā́vad idám bhúvanaṁ víçvam ásti how great this whole creation is;  yátkāmās te
juhumás tán no astu what desiring we sacrifice to thee, let that become ours;  yatamás títṛpsāt
whichever one desires to enjoy.
b. The presence of a relative word in the sentence does not, of course, accent the verb,
unless this is really the predicate of a dependent clause: thus, ápa tyé tāyávo yathā yanti they
make off like thieves (as thieves do); yát sthā́ jágac ca rejate  whatever [is] immovable and
movable trembles; yathākā́maṁ ní padyate  he lies down at his pleasure.
c. The particle ca when it means if, and céd (ca+id) if, give an accent to the verb: thus,
brahmā́ céd dhástam ágrahīt if a Brahman has grasped her hand;  tváṁ ca soma no váço jīvā́tuṁ
ná marāmahe if thou, Soma, willest us to live, we shall not die;  ā́ ca gácchān mitrám enā
dadhāma if he will come here, we will make friends with him.
d. There are a very few passages in which the logical dependence of a clause containing no
subordinating word appears to give the verb its accent: thus, sám áçvaparṇāç cáranti no náro
‘smā́kam indra rathíno jayantu when our men, horse-winged, come into conflict, let the chariot-
fighters of our side, O Indra, win the victory. Rarely, too, an imperative so following another
imperative that its action may seem a consequence of the latter's is accented: thus, tū́yam ā́
gahi káṇveṣu sú sácā píba come hither quickly; drink along with the Kanvas  (i. e. in order to
drink).
e. A few other particles give the verb an accent, in virtue of a slight subordinating force
belonging to them: thus, especially hí (with its negation nahí), which in its fullest value means
for, but shades off from that into a mere asseverative sense; the verb or verbs connected with
it are always accented: thus, ví té muñcantāṁ vimúco hí sánti  let them release him, for they
are releasers; yác cid dhí ... anāçastā́ iva smási  if we, forsooth, are as it were unrenowned;  —
also néd (ná+íd), meaning lest, that not: thus, nét tvā tápāti sū́ro arcíṣā  that the sun may not
burn thee with his beam; virā́jaṁ néd vicchinádānī́ ’ti  saying to himself,

"lest I cut off the virāj" (such cases are frequent in the Brāhmaṇas); — and the interrogative
kuvíd whether? thus, ukthébhiḥ kuvíd āgamát will he come hither for our praises?
596. But further, the verb of a prior clause is not infrequently accented in antithetical
construction.
a. Sometimes, the relation of the two clauses is readily capable of being regarded as that of
protasis and apodosis; but often, also, such a relation is very indistinct; and the cases of
antithesis shade off into those of ordinary coördination, the line between them appearing to be
rather arbitrarily drawn.
b. In many cases, the antithesis is made distincter by the presence in the two clauses of
correlative words, especially anya—anya, eka—eka, vā—vā, ca—ca: thus, prá-prā ’nyé yánti páry
anyá āsate some go on and on, others sit about  (as if it were while some go etc.); úd vā
siñcádhvam úpa vā pṛṇadhvam either pour out, or fill up;  sáṁ ce ’dhyásvā ’gne prá ca
vardhaye ’mám both do thou thyself become kindled, Agni, and do thou increase this person.
But it is also made without such help: thus, prā́ ’jātāḥ prajā́ janáyati pári prájātā gṛhṇāti  the
unborn progeny he generates, the born he embraces; ápa yusmád ákramīn nā́ ’smā́n upā́vartate
[though] she has gone away from you, she does not come to us;  nā́ ’ndhò ‘dhvaryúr bhávati ná
yajñáṁ rákṣāṅsi ghnanti the priest does not become blind, the demons do not destroy the
sacrifice; kéna sómā gṛhyánte kéna hūyante by whom [on the one hand] are the somas dipped
out? by whom [on the other hand] are they offered?
597. Where the verb would be the same in the two antithetical clauses, it is not infrequently
omitted in the second: thus, beside complete expressions like urvī́ cā́ ’si vásvī cā ’si both thou
art broad and thou art good, occur, much oftener, incomplete ones like agnír amúṣmiṅ loká
ā́sīd yamò ‘smín Agni was in yonder world, Yama [was] in this;  asthnā́ ’nyā́ḥ prajā́ḥ
pratitíṣṭhanti māṅsénā ’nyāḥ by bone some creatures stand firm, by flesh others;  dvipā́c ca
sárvaṁ no rákṣa cátuṣpād yác ca naḥ svám both protect everything of ours that is biped, and
also whatever that is quadruped belongs to us.
a. Accentuation of the verb in the former of two antithetical clauses is a rule more strictly
followed in the Brāhmaṇas than in the Veda, and least strictly in the RV.: thus, in RV., abhí
dyā́m mahinā́ bhuvam (not bhúvam) abhī̀ ’mām pṛthivī́m mahī́m I am superior to the sky in
greatness, also to this great earth; and even índro vidur án̄girasaç ca ghorā́ḥ Indra knows, and
the terrible Angirases.
598. There are certain more or less doubtful cases in which a verb-form is perhaps accented
for emphasis.
a. Thus, sporadically before caná in any wise, and in connection with asseverative particles,
as kíla, an̄gá, evá, and (in ÇB., regularly) hánta: thus, hánte ’mā́m pṛthivī́ṁ vibhájāmahāi come
on! let us share up this earth.

CHAPTER IX.
THE PRESENT-SYSTEM.
599. The present-system, or system of forms coming from the present-stem, is composed (as
was pointed out above) of a present indicative tense, together with a subjunctive (mostly lost in
the classical language), an optative, an imperative, and a participle, and also a past tense, an
augment-preterit, to which we give (by analogy with the Greek) the name of imperfect.
a. These forms often go in Sanskrit grammars by the name of "special tenses", while the
other tense-systems are styled "general tenses" — as if the former were made from a special
tense-stem or modified root, while the latter came, all alike, from the root itself. There is no
reason why such a distinction and nomenclature should be retained; since, on the one hand, the
"special tenses" come in one set of verbs directly from the root, and, on the other hand, the
other tense-systems are mostly made from stems — and, in the case of the aorist, from stems
having a variety of form comparable with that of present-stems.
600. Practically, the present-system is the most prominent and important part of the whole
conjugation, since, from the earliest period of the language, its forms are very much more
frequent than those of all the other systems together.
a. Thus, in the Veda, the occurrences of personal forms of this system are to those of all
others about as three to one; in the Aitareya Brāhmaṇa, as five to one; in the Hitopadeça, as
six to one; in the Çakuntalā, as eight to one; in Manu, as thirty to one.
601. And, as there is also great variety in the manner in which different roots form their
present-stem, this, as being their most conspicuous difference, is made the basis of their
principal classification; and a verb is said to be of this or of that conjugation, or class,
according to the way in which its present-stem is made and inflected.

602. In a small minority of verbs, the present-stem is identical with the root. Then there are
besides (excluding the passive and causative) seven more or less different methods of forming a
present-stem from the root, each method being followed by a larger or smaller number of
verbs. These are the "classes" or "conjugation-classes", as laid down by the native Hindu
grammarians. They are arranged by the latter in a certain wholly artificial and unsystematic
order (the ground of which has never been discovered); and they are wont to be designated in
European works according to this order, or else, after Hindu example, by the root standing at
the head of each class in the Hindu lists. A different arrangement and nomenclature will be
followed here, namely as below — the classes being divided (as is usual in European grammars)
into two more general classes or conjugations, distinguished from one another by wider
differences than those which separate the special classes.
603. The classes of the First or non-a-Conjugation are as follows:
I. The root-class (second class, or ad-class, of the Hindu grammarians); its present-stem is
coincident with the root itself: thus, अ ad eat; इ i go; आस् ās sit; या yā go; िष् dviṣ hate; 
duh milk.
II. The reduplicating class (third or hu-class); the root is reduplicated to form the present-
stem: thus, जु juhu from √ hu sacrifice; ददा dadā from √दा dā give; िबभृ bibhṛ from √भृ bhṛ
bear.
III. The nasal class (seventh or rudh-class); a nasal, extended to the syllable न na in strong
forms, is inserted before the final consonant of the root: thus, ् rundh (or णध् ruṇadh) from
√ध् rudh obstruct; यु् yuñj (or युनज् yunaj) from √युज् yuj join.

IV. a. The nu-class (fifth or su-class); the syllable नु nu is added to the root: thus, सुनु sunu
from √सु su press out; आु āpnu from √आप् āp obtain.
b. A very small number (only half-a-dozen) of roots ending already in न् n, and also one very
common and quite irregularly inflected root not so ending ( kṛ make), add उ u alone to form
the present-stem. This is the eighth or tan-class of the Hindu grammarians; it may be best
ranked by us as a sub-class, the u-class: thus, तनु tanu from √तन् tan stretch.
V. The nā-class (ninth or krī-class); the syllable ना nā (or, in weak forms, नी nī) is added to
the root: thus, ीणा krīṇā (or ीणी krīṇī) from √ी krī buy; ना stabhnā (or नी stabhnī) from
√भ् stabh establish.
604. These classes have in common, as their most fundamental characteristic, a shift of
accent: the tone being now upon the ending, and now upon the root or the class-sign. Along
with this goes a variatior in the stem itself, which has a stronger or fuller form when the
accent rests upon it, and a weaker or briefer form when the accent is on the ending these:
forms are to be distinguished as the strong stem and the weak stem respectively (in part, both
have been given above). The classes also form their optative active, their 2d sing. imperative,
their 3d pl. middle, and their middle participle, in a different manner from the others.
605. In the classes of the Second or a-Conjugation, the present-stem ends in a, and the
accent has a fixed place, remaining always upon the same syllable of the stem, and never
shifted to the endings. Also, the optative, the 2d sing. impv., the 3d pl. middle, and the middle
par-

ticiple, are (as just stated) unlike those of the other conjugation.
606. The classes of this conjugation are as follows:
VI. The a-class, or unaccented a-class (first or bhū-class); the added class-sign is a simply;
and the root, which has the accent, is (if capable of it) strengthened by guṇa throughout: thus,
भव bháva from √भू bhū be; नय náya from √नी nī lead; बोध bódha from √बुध् budh wake; वद váda
from √व vad speak.
VII. The á-class, or accented a-class (sixth or tud-class); the added class-sign is a, as in the
preceding class; but it has the accent, and the unaccented root remains unstrengthened: thus,
तुद tudá from √तु tud thrust; ज sṛjá from √ज् sṛj let loose; सुव suvá from √सू sū give birth.
VIII. The ya-class (fourth or div-class); ya is added to the root, which has the accent: thus,
दी dī́vya from √िदव् div (more properly दीव् dīv: see 765) play; न náhya from √न nah bind; 
krúdhya from √ध् krudh be angry.
IX. The passive conjugation is also properly a present-system only, having a class-sign which
is not extended into the other systems; though it differs markedly from the remaining classes in
having a specific meaning, and in being formable in the middle voice from all transitive verbs.
Its inflection may therefore best be treated next to that of the ya-class, with which it is most
nearly connected, differing from it as the á-class from the a-class. It forms its stem, namely, by
adding an accented yá to the root: thus, अ adyá from √अ ad eat;  rudhyá from √ध् rudh
obstruct; बु budhyá from √बुध् budh wake; तु tudyá from √तु tud thrust.

607. The Hindu grammarians reckon a tenth class or cur-class, having a class-sign áya
added to a strengthened root (thus, coráya from √cur), and an inflection like that of the other
a-stems. Since, however, this stem is not limited to the present-system, but extends also into
the rest of the conjugation — while it also has to a great extent a causative value, and may be
formed in that value from a large number of roots — it will be best treated in full along with
the derivative conjugations (chap. XIV., 1041 ff.).
608. A small number of roots add in the present-system a ch, or substitute a ch for their
final consonant, and form a stem ending in cha or chá, which is then inflected like any a-stem.
This is historically, doubtless, a true class-sign, analogous with the rest; but the verbs showing
it are so few, and in formation so irregular, that they are not well to be put together into a
class, but may best be treated as special cases falling under the other classes.
a. Roots adding ch are ṛ and yu, which make the stems ṛcchá and yúccha.
b. Roots substituting ch for their final are iṣ, uṣ (or vas shine), gam, yam, which make the
stems icchá, ucchá, gáccha, yáccha.
c. Of the so-called roots ending in ch, several are more or less clearly stems, whose use has
been extended from the present to other systems of tenses.
609. Roots are not wholly limited, even in the later language, to one mode of formation of
their present-stem, but are sometimes reckoned as belonging to two or more different
conjugation-classes. And such variety of formation is especially frequent in the Veda, being
exhibited by a considerable proportion of the roots there occurring; already in the Brāhmaṇas,
however, a condition is reached nearly agreeing in this respect with the classical language. The
different present-formations sometimes have differences of meaning; yet not more important
ones than are often found belonging to the same formation, nor of a kind to show clearly a
difference of value as originally belonging to the separate classes of presents. If anything of this
kind is to be established, it must be from the derivative conjugations, which are separated by
no fixed line from the present-systems.
610. We take up now the different classes, in the order in which they have been arranged
above, to describe more in detail, and with illustration, the formation of their present-systems,
and to notice the irregularities belonging under each class.
I. Root-class (second, ad-class).
611. In this class there is no class-sign; the root itself is also present-stem, and to it are
added directly the per-

sonal endings — but combined in subjunctive and optative with the respective mode-signs; and
in the imperfect the augment is prefixed to the root.
a. The accented endings (552) regularly take the accent — except in the imperfect, where it
falls on the augment — and before them the root remains unchanged; before the unaccented
endings, the root takes the guṇa-strengthening.
b. It is only in the first three classes that the endings come immediately in contact with a
final consonant of the root, and that the roles for consonant combination have to be noted and
applied. In these classes, then, additional paradigms will be given, to illustrate the modes of
combination.
1. Present Indicative.
612. The endings are the primary (with अते áte in 3d pl. mid.), added to the bare root. The
root takes the accent, and has guṇa, if capable of it, in the three persons sing. act.
Examples of inflection: a. active, root इ i go: strong form of root-stem, ए é; weak form, इ i;
middle, root ās sit, stem ā́s (irregularly accented throughout: 628).
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
एिम
émi
इवस्
ivás
इमस्
imás
आसे
ā́se
आहे
ā́svahe
आहे
ā́smahe
2
एिष
éṣi
इथस्
ithás
इथ
ithá
आसे
ā́sse
आसाथे
ā́sāthe
आे
ā́ddhve
3
एित
éti
इतस्
itás
यि
yánti
आे
ā́ste
आसाते
ā́sāte
आसते
ā́sate
b. root dviṣ. hate: strong stem-form, dvéṣ; weak, dviṣ. For rules of combination for the final
ṣ, see 226.
1
dvéṣmi
dviṣvás
dviṣmás
dviṣé
dviṣváhe
dviṣmáhe
2
dvékṣi
dviṣṭhás
dviṣṭhá
dvikṣé
dviṣā́the
dviḍḍhvé
3
dvéṣṭi
dviṣṭás
dviṣánti
dviṣṭé
dviṣā́te
dviṣáte
c. root duh milk: strong stem-form, dóh; weak, duh. For rules of combination for the final h,
and for the conversion of the initial to dh, see 222 a, 155, 160.
1
dóhmi
duhvás
duhmás
duhé
duhváhe
duhmáhe
2
dhókṣi
dugdhás
dugdhá
dhukṣé
duhā́the
dhugdhvé
3
dógdhi
dugdhás
duhánti
dugdhé
duhā́te
duháte

d. root lih lick: strong stem, léh; weak, lih. For rules of combination of the final h, see 222
b.
1
léhmi
lihvás
lihmás
lihé
lihváhe
lihmáhe
2
lékṣi
līḍhás
līḍhá
likṣé
lihā́the
līḍhvé
3
léḍhi
līḍhás
lihánti
līḍhé
lihā́te
liháte
613. Examples of the 3d sing. mid. coincident in form with the 1st sing. are not rare in the
older language (both V. and B.): the most frequent examples are ī́çe, duhé, vidé, çáye; more
sporadic are cité, bruve, huvé. To tha of the 2d pl. is added na in sthána, pāthánā, yāthána.
The irregular accent of the 3d pl. mid. is found in RV. in rihaté, duhaté. Examples of the same
person in re and rate also occur: thus (besides those mentioned below, 629–30, 635), vidré,
and, with auxiliary vowel, arhire (unless these are to be ranked, rather, as perfect forms
without reduplication: 790 b).
2. Present Subjunctive.
614. Subjunctive forms of this class are not uncommon in the older language, and nearly all
those which the formation anywhere admits are quotable, from Veda or from Brāhmaṇa. A
complete paradigm, accordingly, is given below, with the few forms not actually quotable for
this class enclosed in brackets. We may take as models (as above), for the active the root i go,
and for the middle the root ās sit, from both of which numerous forms are met with (although
neither for these nor for any others can the whole series be found in actual use).
a. The mode-stems are áya (é+a) and ā́sa (ā́s+a) respectively.
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
áyāni
áyā
áyāva
áyāma
ā́sāi
ā́sāvahāi
[ā́sāvahe]
ā́sāmahāi
[ā́sāmahe]
2
áyasi
áyas
áyathas
áyatha
ā́sase
ā́sāsāi
[ā́sāithe]
[ā́sadhve]
ā́sādhvāi
3
áyati
áyat
áyatas
áyan
ā́sate
ā́sātāi
ā́sāite
[ā́sante] -nta
ā́sāntāi
615. The RV. has no middle forms in āi except those of the first person. The 1st. sing. act.
in ā occurs only in RV., in ayā, bravā, stávā. The 2d and 3d sing. act. with primary endings are
very unusual in the Brāhmaṇas. Forms irregularly made with long ā, like those from present-
stems in a, are not rare in AV. and B.: thus, ayās, ayāt, áyān; ásāt, brávāt; bravāthas; asātha,
ayātha, bravātha, hanātha; ádān, dohān. Of middle forms with secondary endings are found
hánanta, 3d pl., and īçata, 3d sing. (after mā́ prohibitive), which is an isolated example. The
only dual person in āite is brávāite.

3. Present Optative.
616. The personal endings combined with the mode-signs of this mode (या yā in act., ई ī in
mid.) have been given in full above (566). The stem-form is the unaccented and unstrengthened
root.
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
इयाम्
iyā́m
इयाव
iyā́va
इयाम
iyā́ma
आसीय
ā́sīya
आसीविह
ā́sīvahi
आसीमिह
ā́sīmahi
2
इयास्
iyā́s
इयातम्
iyā́tam
इयात
iyā́ta
आसीथास्
ā́sīthās
आसीयाथाम्
ā́sīyāthām
आसीम्
ā́sīdhvam
3
इयात्
iyā́t
इयाताम्
iyā́tām
इयुस्
iyús
आसीत
ā́sīta
आसीयाताम्
ā́sīyātām
आसीरन्
ā́sīran
a. In the same manner, from √dviṣ, dviṣyā́m and dviṣīyá; from √duh, duhyā́m and duhīyá;
from √lih, lihyā́m and lihīyá. The inflection is so regular that the example above given is
enough, with the addition of dviṣīyá, to show the normal accentuation in the middle: thus, sing.
dviṣīyá, dviṣīthā́s, dviṣītá; 
du. dviṣīváhi, dviṣīyā́thām, dviṣīyā́tām; 
pl. dviṣīmáhi, dviṣīdhvám,
dviṣīrán.
b. The RV. has once tana in 2d pl. act. (in syātana).
4. Present Imperative.
617. The imperative adds, in second and third persons, its own endings (with अताम् atām in
3d pl. mid.) directly to the root-stem. The stem is accented and strengthened in 3d sing. act.;
elsewhere, the accent is on the ending and the root remains unchanged. The first persons, so
called, of the later language are from the old subjunctive, and have its strengthened stem and
accent; they are repeated here from where they were given above (614 a). In the 2d sing. act.,
the ending is regularly (as in the two following classes) िध dhi if the root end with a consonant,
and िह hi if it end with a vowel. As examples we take the roots already used for the purpose.

a. Thus, from the roots इ i and आस् ās:
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
अयािन
áyāni
अयाव
áyāva
अयाम
áyāma
आसै
ā́sāi
आसावहै
ā́sāvahāi
आसामहै
ā́sāmahāi
2
इिह
ihí
इतम्
itám
इत
itá
आ
ā́ssva
आसाथाम्
ā́sāthām
आम्
ā́ddhvam
3
एतु
étu
इताम्
itā́m
यु
yántu
आाम्
ā́stām
आसाताम्
ā́sātām
आसताम्
ā́satām
b. From the roots dviṣ and duh and lih:
1
dvéṣāṇi
dvéṣāva
dvéṣāma
dvéṣāi
dvéṣāvahāi
dvéṣāmahāi
2
dviḍḍhí
dviṣṭám
dviṣṭá
dvikṣvá
dviṣā́thām
dviḍḍhvám
3
dvéṣṭu
dviṣṭā́m
dviṣántu
dviṣṭā́m
dviṣā́tām
dviṣátām
1
dóhāni
dóhāva
dóhāma
dóhāi
dóhāvahāi
dóhāmahāi
2
dugdhí
dugdhám
dugdhá
dhukṣvá
duhā́thām
dhugdhvám
3
dógdhu
dugdhā́m
duhántu
dugdhā́m
duhā́tām
duhátām
1
léhāni
léhāva
léhāma
léhāi
léhāvahāi
léhāmahāi
2
līḍhí
līḍhám
līḍhá
likṣvá
lihā́thām
līḍhvám
3
léḍhu
līḍhā́m
lihántu
līḍhā́m
lihā́tām
lihátām
618. The 2d sing. act. ending tāt is found in the older language in a few verbs of this class:
namely, vittā́t, vītāt, brūtā́t, hatāt, yātāt, stutāt. In 3d sing. mid., two or three verbs have in the
older language the ending ām: thus, duhā́m (only RV. case), vidām, çayām; and in 3d pl. mid.
AV. has duhrā́m and duhratām. The use of tana for ta in 2d pl. act. is quite frequent in the
Veda: thus, itana, yātána, attana, etc. And in stota, éta étana, bravītana, çāstána, hantana , we
have examples in the same person of a strong (and accented) stem.
5. Present Participle.
619. a. The active participle has the ending अ् ánt (weak stem-form अत् at) added to the
unstrengthened root. Mechanically, it may be formed from the 3d pl. by dropping the final इ i.
Thus, for the verbs inflected above, the active participles are य् yánt, ह् duhánt, िष्
dviṣánt, िलह् lihánt. The feminine stem ends usually in अती atī́: thus, यती yatī́, हती duhatī́, िषती
dviṣatī́, िलहती lihatī́: but, from roots in ā, in आी ā́ntī or आती ātī́ (449 g).

b. The middle participle has the ending आन āná, added to the unstrengthened root: thus,
इयान iyāná, हान duhāná, िषाण dviṣāṇá, िलहान lihāná.
c. The root ās forms the anomalous and isolated ā́sīna (in RV. also āsāná).
d. But a number of these participles in the older language have a double accent, either on
the ending or on the radical syllable: thus, īçāná and ī́çāna, ohāná and óhāna, duhāná and
dúhāna (also dúghāna), rihāṇá and ríhāṇa, vidāná and vídāna, suvāná and súvāna, stuvāná and
stavāná and stávāna — the last having in part also a strong form of the root.
6. Imperfect.
620. This tense adds the secondary endings to the root as increased by prefixion of the
augment. The root has the guṇa-strengthening (if capable of it) in the three persons of the
singular active, although the accent is always upon the augment. Examples of inflection are:
a. From the roots इ i and आस् ās:
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
आयम्
ā́yam
ऐव
āíva
ऐम
āíma
आिस
ā́si
आिह
ā́svahi
आिह
ā́smahi
2
ऐस्
āís
ऐतम्
āítam
ऐत
āíta
आास्
ā́sthās
आसाथाम्
ā́sāthām
आम्
ā́ddhvam
3
ऐत्
āít
ऐताम्
āítām
आयन्
ā́yan
आ
ā́sta
आसाताम्
ā́sātām
आसत
ā́sata
b. From the roots dviṣ and duh and lih:
1
ádveṣam
ádviṣva
ádviṣma
ádviṣi
ádviṣvahi
ádviṣmahi
2
ádveṭ
ádviṣṭam
ádviṣṭa
ádviṣṭhās
ádviṣāthām
ádviḍḍhvam
3
ádveṭ
ádviṣṭām
ádviṣan
ádviṣṭa
ádviṣātām
ádviṣata
1
ádoham
áduhva
áduhma
áduhi
áduhvahi
áduhmahi
2
ádhok
ádugdham
ádugdha
ádugdhās
áduhāthām
ádhugdhvam
3
ádhok
ádugdhām
áduhan
ádugdha
áduhātām
áduhata
1
áleham
álihva
álihma
álihi
álihvahi
álihmahi
2
áleṭ
álīḍham
álīḍha
álīḍhās
álihāthām
álīḍhvam
3
áleṭ
álīḍhām
álihan
álīḍha
álihātām
álihata
621. a. Roots ending in ā may in the later language optionally take us instead of an in 3d
pl. act. (the ā being lost before it); and

in the older they always do so: thus, áyus from √yā, ápus from √pā protect, abhus from √bhā.
The same ending is also allowed and met with in the case of a few roots ending in consonants:
namely vid know, cakṣ, dviṣ, duh, mṛj. RV. has atviṣus.
b. The ending tana, 2d pl. act., is found in the Veda in áyātana, ásastana, āítana, ábravītana.
A strong stem is seen in the 1st pl. homa, and the 2d pl. abravīta and ábravītana.
c. To save the characteristic endings in 2d and 3d sing. act., the root ad inserts a: thus,
ā́das, ā́dat; the root as inserts ī: thus, ā́sīs, ā́sīt (see below, 636); compare also 631–4.
622. The use of the persons of this tense, without augment, in the older language, has been
noticed above (587). Augmentless imperfects of this class are rather uncommon in the Veda:
thus, hán, vés, 2d sing.; han, vet, stāut, dán (?), 3d sing.; bruvan, duhús, cakṣus, 3d pl.; vasta,
sūta, 3d sing. mid.
623. The first or root-form of aorist is identical in its formation with this imperfect: see
below, 829 ff.
624. In the Veda (but hardly outside of the RV.) are found certain 2d sing. forms, having an
imperative value, made by adding the ending si to the (accented and strengthened) root. In
part, they are the only root-forms belonging to the roots from which they come: thus, jóṣi (for
jóṣṣi, from √juṣ) , dhákṣi, párṣi (√pṛ pass) , prā́si, bhakṣi, ratsi, sátsi, hoṣi; but the majority of
them have forms (one or more) of a root-present, or sometimes of a root-aorist, beside them:
thus, kṣéṣi (√kṣi rule), jéṣi, dárṣi, nakṣi (√naç. attain), néṣi, mátsi, māsi (√mā measure) , yákṣi,
yáṁsi, yāsi, yótsi, rā́si, vákṣi (√vah) , véṣi, çróṣi, sakṣi. Their formal character is somewhat
disputed; but they are probably indicative persons of the root-class, used imperatively.
625. Forms of this class are made from nearly 150 roots, either in the earlier language, or
in the later, or in both: namely, from about 50 through the whole life of the language, from 80
in the older period (of Veda, Brāhmaṇa, and Sūtra) alone, and from a few (about 15) in the
later period (epic and classical) only[1]. Not a few of these roots, however, show only sporadic
root-forms, beside a more usual conjugation of some other class; nor is it in all cases possible
to separate clearly root-present from root-aorist forms.
a. Many roots of this class, as of the other classes of the first conjugation, show transfers to
the second or a-conjugation, forming a conjugation-stem by adding a to their strong or weak
stem, or
1. ↑ Such statements of numbers, with regard to the various parts of the system of
conjugation, are in all cases taken from the author's Supplement to this grammar, entitled
"Roots, Verb-Forms, and Primary Derivatives of the Sanskrit Language", where lists of
roots, and details as to forms etc., are also given.

even to both: thus, from √mṛj, both mārja (627) and mṛja. Such transfers are met with even in
the oldest language; but they usually become more frequent later, often establishing a new
mode of present inflection by the side of, or in substitution for, the earlier mode.
b. A number of roots offer irregularities of inflection; these are, in the main, pointed out in
the following paragraphs.
Irregularities of the Root-class.
626. The roots of the class ending in u have in their strong forms the vṛddhi instead of the
guṇa-strengthening before an ending beginning with a consonant: thus, from √stu, stāúmi,
ástāut, and the like: but ástavam, stávāni, etc.
a. Roots found to exhibit this peculiarity in actual use are kṣṇu, yu unite, su (or sū) impel,
sku, stu, snu (these in the earlier language), nu, ru, and hnu. RV. has once stoṣi, and anāvan.
Compare also 633.
627. The root mṛj also has the vṛddhi-vowel in its strong forms: thus, mā́rjmi, ámārjam,
ámārṭ (150 b); and the same strengthening is said to be allowed in weak forms before endings
beginning with a vowel: thus, mārjantu, amārjan; but the only quotable case is mārjīta (LÇS.).
Forms from a-stems begin to appear already in AV.
a In the other tense-systems, also, and in derivation, mṛj shows often the vṛddhi instead of
the guṇa-strengthening.
628. A number of roots accent the radical syllable throughout, both in strong and in weak
forms: thus, all those beginning with a long vowel, ās, īḍ, īr, īç; and also cakṣ, takṣ, trā, nīṅs,
vas clothe, çiñj, çī lie, and sū. All these, except takṣ and trā (and trā also in the Vedic forms),
are ordinarily conjugated in middle voice only. Forms with the same irregular accent occur now
and then in the Veda from other verbs: thus, mátsva, yákṣva, sákṣva, sā́kṣva, ṛ́dhat. Middle
participles so accented have been noticed above (619 d).
629. Of the roots mentioned in the last paragraph, çī lie has the guṇa-strengthening
throughout: thus, çáye, çéṣe, çáyīya, çáyāna, and so on. Other irregularities in its inflection (in
part already noticed) are the 3d pl. persons çérate (AV. etc. have also çére), çératām, áçerata
(RV. has also áçeran), the 3d sing. pres. çáye (R.) and impv. çáyām. The isolated active form
áçayat is common in the older language; other a-forms, active and middle, occur later.
630. Of the same roots, īḍ and īç insert a union-vowel i before certain endings: thus, ī́çiṣe,
ī́çidhve, ī́ḍiṣva (these three being the only forms noted in the older language); but RV. has ī́kṣe
beside ī́çiṣe; the ÇvU. has once īçite for īṣṭe. The 3d pl. ī́çire (on account of its accent) is also
apparently present rather than perfect. The MS. has once the 3d sing. impf. āiça (like aduha:
635).

631. The roots rud weep, svap sleep, an breathe, and çvas blow insert a union-vowel i
before all the endings beginning with a consonant, except the s and t of 2d and 3d sing. impf.,
where they insert instead either a or ī: thus, svápimi, çvásiṣi, ániti, and ā́nat or ā́nīt. And in the
other forms, the last three are allowed to accent either root or ending: thus, svápantu and
çvásantu (AV.), or svapántu etc. The AV. has sváptu instead of svápitu.
a. In the older language, √vam makes the same insertions: thus, vamiti, avamīt; and other
cases occasionally occur: thus, jániṣva, vasiṣva (√vas clothe) , çnathihi, stanihi (all RV.), yamiti
(JB.), çocimi (MBh.). On the other hand, √an early makes forms from an a-stem: thus, ánati
(AV.); pple ánant (ÇB.); opt. anet (AB.).
632. The root brū speak, say (of very frequent use) takes the union-vowel ī after the root
when strengthened, before the initial consonant of an ending: thus, brávīmi, brávīṣi, brávīti,
ábravīs, ábravīt; but brūmás, brūyā́m, ábravam, ábruvan, etc. Special occasional irregularities
are brūmi, bravīhi, abruvam, abrūvan, bruyāt, and sporadic forms from an a-stem. The subj.
dual brávāite has been noticed above (616); also the strong forms abravīta, ábravītana (621 a).
633. Some of the roots in u are allowed to be inflected like brū: namely, ku, tu, ru, and
stu; and an occasional instance is met with of a form so made (in the older language, only
tavīti noted; in the later, only stavīmi, once).
634. The root am (hardly found in the later language) takes ī as union-vowel: thus, amīṣi
(RV.), amīti and āmīt and amīṣva (TS). From √çam occur çamīṣva (VS. ; TS. çamiṣva) and
çamīdhvam (TB. etc.).
635. The irregularities of √duh in the older language have been already in part noted: the
3d pl. indic. mid. duhaté, duhré, and duhráte; 3d sing. impv. duhā́m, pl. duhrā́m and duhratām;
impf. act. 3d sing. áduhat (which is found also in the later language), 3d pl. aduhran (beside
áduhan and duhús); the mid. pple dúghāna; and (quite unexampled elsewhere) the opt. forms
duhīyát and duhīyán (RV. only). The MS. has aduha 3d sing. and aduhra 3d pl. impf. mid.,
apparently formed to correspond to the pres. duhe (613) and duhre as adugdha and aduhata
correspond to dugdhe and duhate: compare āiça (630), related in like manner to the 3d sing.
īçe.
Some of the roots of this class are abbreviated or otherwise weakened in their weak forms:
thus: —
636. The root अस् as be loses its vowel in weak forms (except where protected by
combination with the augment). Its 2d sing. indic. is अिस ási (instead of assi); its 2d sing. impv.
is एिध edhí (irregularly from asdhi). The insertion of

ई ī in 2d and 3d sing. impf. has been noticed already above.
a. The forms of this extremely common verb are, then, as follows:
Indicative.
Optative.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
अि
ásmi
स्
svás
स्
smás
ाम्
syā́m
ाव
syā́va
ाम
syā́ma
2
अिस
ási
स्
sthás

sthá
ास्
syā́s
ातम्
syā́tam
ात
syā́ta
3
अि
ásti
स्
stás
सि
sánti
ात्
syā́t
ाताम्
syā́tām
ुस्
syús
Imperative.
Imperfect.
1
असािन
ásāni
असाव
ásāva
असाम
ásāma
आसम्
ā́sam
आ
ā́sva
आ
ā́sma
2
एिध
edhí
म्
stám

stá
आसीस्
ā́sīs
आम्
ā́stam
आ
ā́sta
3
अु
ástu
ाम्
stā́m
सु
sántu
आसीत्
ā́sīt
आाम्
ā́stām
आसन्
ā́san
Participle स् sánt (fem. सती satī́).
b. Besides the forms of the present-system, there is made from this root only a perfect, ā́sa
etc. (800), of wholly regular inflection.
c. The Vedic subjunctive forms are the usual ones, made upon the stem ása. They are in
frequent use, and appear (asat especially) even in late texts where the subjunctive is almost
lost. The resolution siā́m etc. (opt.) is common in Vedic verse. As 2d and 3d sing. impf. is a
few times met with the more normal ās (for ās-s, ās-t). Sthána, 2d pl., was noted above (613).
d. Middle forms from √as are also given by the grammarians as allowed with certain
prepositions (vi+ati), but they are not quotable; smahe and syāmahe (!) occur in the epics, but
are merely instances of the ordinary epic confusion of voices (529 a). Confusions of primary and
secondary endings — namely, sva and sma (not rare), and, on the other hand, syāvas and
syāmas — are also epic. A middle present indicative is said to be compounded (in 1st and 2d
persons) with the nomen agentis in tṛ (tar) to form a periphrastic future in the middle voice
(but see below, 947). The 1st sing. indic. is he; the rest is in the usual relation of middle to
active forms (in 2d pers., se, dhve, sva, dhvam, with total loss of the root itself).

637. The root han smite, slay is treated somewhat after the manner of noun-stems in an in
declension (421): in weak forms, it loses its n before an initial consonant (except m and v) of a
personal ending (not in the optative), and its a before an initial vowel — and in the latter case
its h, in contact with the n, is changed to gh (compare 402). Thus, for example:
Present Indicative.
Imperfect.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
hánmi
hanvás
hanmás
áhanam
áhanva
áhanma
2
háṅsi
hathás
hathá
áhan
áhatam
áhata
3
hánti
hatás
ghnánti
áhan
áhatām
ághnan
a. Its participle is ghnánt 
(fem. ghnatī́). Its 2d sing. impv. is jahí (by anomalous
dissimilation, on the model of reduplicating forms).
b. Middle forms from this root are frequent in the Brāhmaṇas, and those that occur are
formed in general according to the same rules: thus, hate, hanmahe, ghnate; ahata, aghnātām,
aghnata (in AB., also ahata) ; ghnīta (but also hanīta). Forms from transfer-stems, hana and
ghna, are met with from an early period.
638. The root vaç be eager is in the weak forms regularly and usually contracted to uç (as
in the perfect: 794 b): thus, uçmási (V.: once apparently abbreviated in RV. to çmasi), uçánti;
pple uçánt, uçāná. Middle forms (except the pple) do not occur; nor do the weak forms of the
imperfect, which are given as āuçva, āuṣṭam, etc.
a. RV. has in like, manner the participle uṣāṇá from the root vas clothe.
639. The root çās order shows some of the peculiarities of a reduplicated verb, lacking
(646) the n before t in all 3d persons pl. and in the active participle. A part of its active forms
— namely, the weak forms having endings beginning with consonants (including the optative) —
are said to come from a stem with weakened vowel, çiṣ (as do the aorist, 854, and some of the
derivatives); but, excepting the optative (çiṣyām etc., U. S. and later), no such forms are
quotable.
a. The 3d sing. impf. is açāt (555 a), and the same form is said to be allowed also as 2d
sing. The 2d sing. impv. is çādhí (with total loss of the s); and RV. has the strong 2d pl.
çāstána (with anomalous accent); and a-forms, from stem (çāsa, occasionally occur.
b. The middle inflection is regular, and the accent (apparently) always upon the radical
syllable (çā́ste, (çā́sate, çā́sāna).
c. The root dāç worship has in like manner (RV.) the pple dā́çat (not dā́çant).
640. The double so-called root jakṣ eat, laugh is an evident reduplication of ghas and has
respectively. It has the absence of n in act.

3d persons pl. and pple, and the accent on the root before vowel-endings, which belong to
reduplicated verbs; and it also takes the union-vowel i in the manner of rud etc. (above, 631).
For its forms and derivatives made with utter loss of the final sibilant, see 233 f.
641. Certain other obviously reduplicated verbs are treated by the native grammarians as if
simple, and referred to this conjugation: such are the intensively reduplicated jāgṛ (1020 a),
daridrā (1024 a), and vevī (1024 a), dīdhī etc. (676), and cakās (677).
II. Reduplicating Class (third, hu-class).
642. This class forms its present-stem by prefixing a reduplication to the root.
643. a. As regards the consonant of the reduplication, the general rules which have already
been given above (590) are followed.
b. A long vowel is shortened in the reduplicating syllable: thus,
ददा dadā from √दा dā; िबभी bibhī from √भी bhī; जु juhū from √ hū. The vowel ऋ ṛ never
appears in the reduplication, but is replaced by इ i: thus, िबभृ bibhṛ from √भृ bhṛ; िपपृच् pipṛc from
√पृच् pṛc.
c. For verbs in which a and ā also are irregularly represented in the reduplication by i, see
below, 660. The root vṛt (V. B.) makes vavartti etc.; cakránt (RV.) is very doubtful.
d. The only root of this class with initial vowel is ṛ (or ar); it takes as reduplication i, which
is held apart from the root by an interposed y: thus, iyar and iyṛ (the latter has not been found
in actual use).
644. The present-stem of this class (as of the other classes belonging to the first or non- a-
conjugation) has a double form: a stronger form, with gunated root-vowel; and a weaker form,
without guṇa: thus, from √ hu, the two forms are जुहो juho and जु juhu; from √भी bhī, they are
िबभे bibhe and िबभी bibhī. And the rule for their use is the same as in the other classes of this
conjugation: the strong stem is found before the unaccented endings (552), and the weak stem
before the accented.

645. According to all the analogies of the first general conjugation, we should expect to find
the accent upon the root-syllable when this is strengthened. That is actually the case, however,
only in a small minority of the roots composing the class: namely, in hu, bhī (no test-forms in
the older language), hrī (no test-forms found in the older language), mad (very rare), jan (no
forms of this class found to occur) , ci notice (in V.), yu separate (in older language only), and
in bhṛ in the later language (in V. it goes with the majority: but RV. has bibhárti once, and AV.
twice; and this, the later accentuation, is found also in the Brāhmaṇas); and RV. has once
iyárṣi. In all the rest — apparently, by a recent transfer — it rests upon the reduplicating
instead of upon the radical syllable. And in both classes alike, the accent is anomalously thrown
back upon the reduplication in those weak forms of which the ending begins with a vowel;
while in the other weak forms it is upon the ending (but compare 666 a).
a. Apparently (the cases with written accent are too few to determine the point
satisfactorily) the middle optative endings, īya etc. (566), are reckoned throughout as endings
with initial vowel, and throw back the accent upon the reduplication.
646. The verbs of this class lose the न् n in the 3d pl. endings in active as well as middle,
and in the imperfect have उस् us instead of अन् an — and before this a final radical vowel has
guṇa.
1. Present Indicative.
647. The combination of stem and endings is as in the preceding class.
Examples of inflection: a. √ hu sacrifice: strong stem-form, जुहो juhó; weak form,जु juhu (or
júhu).
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
जुहोिम
juhómi
जुवस्
juhuvás
जुमस्
juhumás
जुे
júhve
जुवहे
juhuváhe
जुमहे
juhumáhe
2
जुहोिष
juhóṣi
जुथस्
juhuthás
जुथ
juhuthá
जुषे
juhuṣé
जुाथे
júhvāthe
जुे
juhudhvé
3
जुहोित
juhóti
जुतस्
juhutás
जुित
júhvati
जुते
juhuté
जुाते
júhvāte
जुते
júhvate

b. Root भृ bhṛ bear (given with Vedic accentuation): strong stem-form, िबभ bíbhar; weak, िबभृ
bibhṛ (or bíbhṛ).
1
िबभम
bíbharmi
िबभृवस्
bibhṛvás
िबभृमस्
bibhṛmás
िबे
bíbhre
िबभृवहे
bibhṛváhe
िबभृमहे
bibhṛmáhe
2
िबभष
bíbharṣi
िबभृथस्
bibhṛthás
िबभृथ
bibhṛthá
िबभृषे
bibhṛṣé
िबाथे
bíbhrāthe
िबभृे
bibhṛdhvé
3
िबभत
bíbharti
िबभृतस्
bibhṛtás
िबित
bíbhrati
िबभृते
bibhṛté
िबाते
bíbhrāte
िबते
bíbhrate
c. The u of hu (like that of the class-signs nu and u: see below, 697 a) is said to be
omissible before v and m of the endings of 1st du. and pl.: thus, juhvás, juhváhe, etc.; but no
such forms are quotable.
2. Present Subjunctive.
648. It is not possible at present to draw a distinct line between those subjunctive forms of
the older language which should be reckoned as belonging to the present-system and those
which should be assigned to the perfect — or even, in some cases, to the reduplicated aorist
and intensive. Here will be noticed only those which most clearly belong to this class; the more
doubtful cases will be treated under the perfect-system. Except in first persons (which continue
in use as "imperatives" down to the later language), subjunctives from roots having
unmistakably a reduplicated present-system are of far from frequent occurrence.
649. The subjunctive mode-stem is formed in the usual manner, with the mode-sign a and
guṇa of the root-vowel, if this is capable of such strengthening. The evidence of the few
accented forms met with indicates that the accent is laid in accordance with that of the strong
indicative forms: thus, from √hu, the stem would be juháva; from √bhṛ, it would be bíbhara (but
bibhára later). Before the mode-sign, final radical ā would be, in accordance with analogies
elsewhere, dropped: thus, dáda from √dā, dádha from √dhā (all the forms actually occurring
would be derivable from the secondary roots dad and dadh).
650. Instead of giving a theoretically complete scheme of inflection, it will be better to note
all the examples quotable from the older language (accented when found so occurring).
a. Thus, of 1st persons, we have in the active juhávāni, bibharāṇi, dadāni, dadhāni, jahāni;
juhavāma, dádhāma, jáhāma; — in the middle, dadhāi, mimāi; dadhāvahāi; juhavāmahāi,
dadāmahe, dadāmahāi, dadhāmahāi.
b. Of other persons, we have with primary endings in the active bibharāsi (with double
mode-sign: 560 e), dádhathas, juhavātha (do.)

and juhavatha; in the middle, dádhase; dádhate, rárate, dádhātāi, dadātāi;  — with secondary
endings, dádhas, víveṣas, juhavat, bibharat, yuyávat, dádhat, dadhánat, babhasat; dadhan,
yuyavan, juhavan.
3. Present Optative.
651. To form this mode, the optative endings given above (566 a), as made up of mode-sign
and personal endings, are added to the unstrengthened stem. The accent is as already stated
(645 a). The inflection is so regular that it is unnecessary to give here more than the first
persons of a single verb: thus,
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
जुयाम्
juhuyā́m
जुयाव
juhuyā́va
जुयाम
juhuyā́ma
जुीय
júhvīya
जुीविह
júhvīvahi
जुीमिह
júhvīmahi
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
4. Present Imperative.
652. The endings, and the mode of their combination with the root, have been already
given. In 2d sing. act., the ending is िह hi after a vowel, but िध dhi after a consonant:  hu,
however, forms जुिध juhudhí (apparently, in order to avoid the recurrence of  h in two
successive syllables): and other examples of िध dhi after a vowel are found in the Veda.
653. a. Example of inflection:
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
जुहवािन
juhávāni
जुहवाव
juhávāva
जुहवाम
juhávāma
जुहवै
juhávāi
जुहवावहै
juhávāvahāi
जुहवामहै
juhávāmahāi
2
जुिध
juhudhí
जुतम्
juhutám
जुत
juhutá
जु
juhuṣvá
जुाथाम्
júhvāthām
जुम्
juhudhvám
3
जुहोतु
juhótu
जुताम्
juhutā́m
जुतु
júhvatu
जुताम्
juhutā́m
जुाताम्
júhvātām
जुताम्
júhvatām
b. The verbs of the other division differ here, as in the indicative, in the accentuation of
their strong forms only: namely, in all the

first persons (borrowed subjunctives), and in the 3d sing. act.: thus, (in the older language)
bíbharāṇi etc., bíbhartu, bíbharāi etc.
654. Vedic irregularities of inflection are: 1. the occasional use of strong forms in 2d
persons: thus, yuyodhí, çiçādhi (beside çiçīhí) ; yuyotam (beside yuyutám) ; íyarta, dádāta and
dadātana, dádhāta and dádhātana (see below, 668), pipartana, juhóta and juhótana, yuyota and
yuyotana; rarāsva (666); 2. the use of dhi instead of hi after a vowel (only in the two instances
just quoted); 3. the ending tana in 2d pl. act.: namely, besides those just given, in jigātana,
dhattana, mamáttana, vivaktana, didiṣṭana, bibhītana, jujuṣṭana, juhutana, vavṛttana: the cases
are proportionally much more numerous in this than in any other class; 4. the ending tāt in 2d
sing. act., in dattāt, dhattā́t, pipṛtāt, jahītāt.
5. Present Participle.
655. As elsewhere, the active participle-stem may be made mechanically from the 3d pl.
indic. by dropping इ i: thus, जुत् júhvat, िबत् bíbhrat. In inflection, it has no distinction of
strong and weak forms (444). The feminine stem ends in अती atī. The middle participles are
regularly made: thus, जुान júhvāna, िबाण bíbhrāṇa.
a. RV. shows an irregular accent in pipāná (√pā drink).
6. Imperfect.
656. As already pointed out, the 3d pl. act. of this class takes the ending उस् us, and a final
radical vowel has guṇa before it. The strong forms are, as in present indicative, the three
singular active persons.
657. Examples of inflection:
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
अजुहवम्
ájuhavam
अजुव
ájuhuva
अजुम
ájuhuma
अजुि
ájuhvi
अजुविह
ájuhuvahi
अजुमिह
ájuhumahi
2
अजुहोस्
ájuhos
अजुतम्
ájuhutam
अजुत
ájuhuta
अजुथास्
ájuhuthās
अजुाथाम्
ájuhvāthām
अजुम्
ájuhudhvam
3
अजुहोत्
ájuhot
अजुताम्
ájuhutām
अजुहवुस्
ájuhavus
अजुत
ájuhuta
अजुाताम्
ájuhvātām
अजुत
ájuhvata

a. From √भृ bhṛ, the 2d and 3d sing. act. are अिबभ ábibhar (for abibhar-s and abibhar-t) —
and so in all other cases where the strong stem ends in a consonant. The 3d pl. act. is अिबभस्
ábibharus; and other like cases are ábibhayus, acikayus, asuṣavus.
b. In MS., once, abibhrus is doubtless a false reading.
658. The usual Vedic irregularities in 2d pl. act. — strong forms, and the ending tana —
occur in this tense also: thus, ádadāta, ádadhāta; ádattana, ájahātana. The RV. has also once
apiprata for apipṛta in 3d sing. mid., and abibhran for abibharus in 3d pl. act. Examples of
augmentless forms are çiçās, vivés, jígāt; jíhīta, çíçīta, jihata; and, with irregular strengthening,
yuyoma (AV.), yuyothās, yuyota.
659. The roots that form their present-stem by reduplication are a very small class,
especially in the modern language; they are only 50, all told, and of these only a third (16) are
met with later. It is, however, very difficult to determine the precise limits of the class, because
of the impossibility (referred to above, under subjunctive: 648) of always distinguishing its
forms from those of other reduplicating conjugations and parts of conjugations.
a. Besides the irregularities in tense-inflection already pointed out, others may be noticed as
follows.
Irregularities of the Reduplicating Class.
660. Besides the roots in ṛ or ar — namely, ṛ, ghṛ (usually written ghar), tṛ, pṛ, bhṛ, sṛ, hṛ,
pṛc — the following roots having a or ā as radical vowel take i instead of a in the reduplicating
syllable: gā go, mā measure, mā bellow, çā, hā remove (mid.), vac, sac; vaç. has both i and a;
rā has i once in RV.; for sthā, pā drink ghrā, han, hi, see below (670–4).
661. Several roots of this class in final ā change the ā in weak forms to ī (occasionally even
to i), and then drop it altogether before endings beginning with a vowel.
a. This is in close analogy with the treatment of the vowel of the class-sign of the nā-class:
below, 717.
These roots are:
662. çā sharpen, act. and mid.: thus, çiçāti, çiçīmasi, çiçīhí (also çiçādhi: above, 654),
çiçātu, açiçāt, çíçīte, çíçīta.
663. mā bellow, act., and mā measure, mid. (rarely also act.): thus, mimāti, mimīyāt;
mímīte, mimate, ámimīta; mimīhi, mímātu. RV. has once mimanti 3d pl. (for mimati).

664. hā remove, mid.: thus, jíhīte, jihīdhve, jíhate; jihīṣva, jihatām; ájihīta, ajihata . ÇB. has
jihīthām (for jihāthām).
665. hā quit, act. (originally identical with the former), may further shorten the ī to i: thus,
jahāti, jahīta, jahītāt (AV.); jahimas (AV.), jahitas (TB.), jahitam (TA.), ajahitām (TS. AB.). In the
optative, the radical vowel is lost altogether; thus, jahyām, jahyus (AV.). The 2d sing. impv.,
according to the grammarians, is jahīhi or jahihi or jahāhi; only the first appears quotable.
a. Forms from an a-stem, jaha, are made for this root, and even derivatives from a quasi-
root jah.
666. rā give, mid.: thus, rarīdhvam, rarīthās (impf. without augment); and, with i in
reduplication, rirīhi. But AV. has rarāsva.
a. In these verbs, the accent is generally constant on the reduplicating syllable.
667. The two roots dā and dhā (the commonest of the class) lose their radical vowel
altogether in the weak forms, being shortened to dad and dadh. In 2d sing. impv. act., they
form respectively dehí and dhehí. In combination with a following t or th, the final dh of dadh
does not follow the special rule of combination of a final sonant aspirate (becoming ddh with
the t or th: 160), but — as also before s and dhv — the more general rules of aspirate and of
surd and sonant combination; and its lost aspiration is thrown back upon the initial of the root
(155).
668. The inflection of √dhā is, then, as follows:
Present Indicative
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
dádhāmi
dadhvás
dadhmás
dadhé
dádhvahe
dádhmahe
2
dádhāsi
dhatthás
dhatthá
dhatsé
dadhāthe
dhaddhve
3
dádhāti
dhattás
dádhati
dhatté
dadhā́te
dádhate
Present Optative.
1
dadhyā́m
dadhyā́va
dadhyā́ma
dádhīya
dádhīvahi
dádhīmahi
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
Present Imperative.
1
dádhāni
dádhāva
dádhāma
dádhāi
dádhāvahāi
dádhāmahāi
2
dhehí
dhattám
dhattá
dhatsva
dadhāthām
dhaddhvam
3
dádhātu
dhattā́m
dádhatu
dhattām
dadhātām
dadhatām
Imperfect.
1
ádadhām
ádadhva
ádadhma
ádadhi
ádadhvahi
ádadhmahi
2
ádadhās
ádhattam
ádhatta
ádhatthās
ádadhāthām
ádhaddhvam
3
ádadhāt
ádhattām
ádadhus
ádhatta
ádadhātām
ádadhata

Participles: act. dádhat; mid. dádhāna.
a. In the middle (except impf.), only those forms are here accented for which there is
authority in the accentuated texts, as there is discordance between the actual accent and that
which the analogies of the class would lead us to expect. RV. has once dhátse: dadhé and
dadhā́te might be perfects, so far as the form is concerned. RV. accents dadhītá once (dádhīta
thrice); several other texts have dádhīta, dádhīran, dádīta.
b. The root dā is inflected in precisely the same way, with change everywhere of (radical)
dh to d.
669. The older language has irregularities as follows: 1. the usual strong forms in 2d pl.,
dádhāta and ádadhāta, dádāta and ádadāta; 2. the usual tana endings in the same person,
dhattana, dádātana, etc. (654, 658); 3. the 3d sing. indic. act. dadhé (like 1st sing.); 4. the 2d
sing. impv. act. daddhí (for both dehi and dhehi). And R. has dadmi.
670. A number of roots have been transferred from this to the a- or bhū-class (below, 749),
their reduplicated root becoming a stereotyped stem inflected after the manner of a-stems.
These roots are as follows:
671. In all periods of the language, from the roots sthā stand, pā drink, and ghrā smell, are
made the presents tíṣṭhāmi, píbāmi (with irregular sonantizing of the second p), and jíghrāmi —
which then are inflected not like mímāmi, but like bhávāmi, as if from the present-stems tíṣṭha,
píba, jíghra.
672. In the Veda (especially; also later), the reduplicated roots dā and dhā are sometimes
turned into the a-stems dáda and dádha, or inflected as if roots dad and dadh of the a-class;
and single forms of the same character are made from other roots: thus, mimanti (√mā bellow),
rárate (√rā give: 3d sing. mid.).
673. In the Veda, also, a like secondary stem, jighna, is made from √han (with omission of
the radical vowel, and conversion, usual in this root, of h to gh when in contact with n: 637);
and some of the forms of saçc, from √sac, show the same conversion to an a-stem, saçca.
674. In AB. (viii. 28), a similar secondary form, jighya, is given to √hi or hā: thus, jighyati,
jighyatu.
675. A few so-called roots of the first or root-class are the products of reduplication, more
or less obvious: thus, jakṣ (640), and probably çās (from √ças) and cakṣ (from √kāç or a lost
root kas see). In the Veda is found also saçc, from √sac.
676. The grammarians reckon (as already noticed, 641) several roots of the most evidently
reduplicate character as simple, and belonging to the root-class. Some of these (jāgṛ, daridrā,
vevī) are regular intensive stems, and will be described below under Intensives (1020 a, 1024
a); dīdhī shine, together with Vedic dīdī shine and pīpī swell, are sometimes also classed as
intensives; but they have not the proper reduplication of

such, and may perhaps be best noticed here, as reduplicated present-stems with irregularly
long reduplicating vowel.
a. Of pres. indic. occurs in the older language only dīdyati, 3d pl., with the pples dī́dyat and
dī́dhyat, and mid. dīdye, dīdhye, dīdhyāthām, with the pples dī́dyāna, dī́dhyāna, pī́pyāna. The
subj. stems are dīdáya, dīdhaya, pīpáya, and from them are made forms with both primary
(from dīdáya) and secondary endings (and the irregularly accented dī́dayat and dīdāyat and
dī́dhayan). No opt. occurs. In impv. we have dīdihí (and didīhí) and pīpihí, and pipyatam,
pipyatām, pipyata. In impf., adīdes and pīpes, ádīdet and ádīdhet and apīpet (with augmentless
forms), apīpema (with strong form of root), and adīdhayus and (irregular) apīpyan.
b. A few forms from all the three show transfer to an a-inflection: thus, dīdhaya and pīpaya
(impv.), ápīpayat, etc.
c. Similar forms from √mī bellow are amīmet and mīmayat.
677. The stem cakās shine (sometimes cakāç) is also regarded by the grammarians as a
root, and supplied as such with tenses outside the present-system — which, however, hardly
occur in genuine use. It is not known in the older language.
678. The root bhas chew loses its radical vowel in weak forms, taking the form baps: thus,
bábhasti, but bápsati (3d pl.), bápsat (pple). For babdhām, see 233 f.
679. The root bhī fear is allowed by the grammarians to shorten its vowel in weak forms:
thus, bibhīmas or bibhimas, bibhīyām or bibhiyām; and bibhiyāt etc. are met with in the later
language.
680. Forms of this class from √jan give birth, with added i — thus, jajñiṣe, jajñidhve — are
given by the grammarians, but have never been found in use.
681. The roots ci and cit have in the Veda reversion of c to k in the root-syllable after the
reduplication: thus, cikéṣi, cikéthe (anomalous, for cikyā́the) , cikitām, aciket, cíkyat (pple);
cikiddhi.
682. The root vyac has i in the reduplication (from the y), and is contracted to vic in weak
forms: thus, viviktás, áviviktām. So the root hvar (if its forms are to be reckoned here) has u in
reduplication, and contracts to hur: thus, juhūrthās.
III. Nasal Class (seventh, rudh-class).
683. The roots of this class all end in consonants. And their class-sign is a nasal preceding
the final consonant: in the weak forms, a nasal simply, adapted in character to the consonant;
but in the strong forms expanded to the syllable न ná, which has the accent.

a. In a few of the verbs of the class, the nasal extends also into other tense-systems: they
are añj, bhañj, hiṅs: see below, 694.
1. Present Indicative.
684. Examples of inflection: a. the root युज् yuj join: strong stem-form, युनज् yunáj; weak, यु्
yuñj.
For the rules of combination of final j, see 219.
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
युनिम
yunájmi
युस्
yuñjvás
युमस्
yuñjmás
युे
yuñjé
युहे
yuñjváhe
युमहे
yuñjmáhe
2
युनि
yunákṣi
युथस्
yun̄kthás
युथ
yun̄kthá
युे
yun̄kṣé
युाथे
yuñjā́the
युे
yun̄gdhvé
3
युनि
yunákti
युस्
yun̄ktás
युि
yuñjánti
युे
yun̄kté
युाते
yuñjā́te
युते
yuñjáte
b. the root ध् rudh obstruct; bases णध् ruṇadh and ् rundh.
For rules of combination of final dh, see 153, 160.
1
णि
ruṇádhmi
स्
rundhvás
स्
rundhmás
े
rundhé
हे
rundhváhe
हे
rundhmáhe
2
णि
ruṇátsi
स्
runddhás

runddhá
े
runtsé
ाथे
rundhā́the
े
runddhvé
3
णि
ruṇáddhi
स्
runddhás
ि
rundhánti
े
runddhé
ाते
rundhā́te
ते
rundháte
c. Instead of yun̄kthas, yun̄gdhve, and the like (here and in the impv. and impf.), it is
allowed and more usual (231) to write yun̄thas, yun̄dhve, etc.; and, in like manner, rundhas,
rundhe, for runddhas, runddhe; and so in other like cases.
685. Vedic irregularities of inflection are: 1. the ordinary use of a 3d sing. mid. like the 1st
sing., as vṛñje; 2. the accent on té of 3d pl. mid. in añjaté, indhaté, bhuñjaté.
a. Yunañkṣi, in BhP., is doubtless a false reading.
2. Present Subjunctive.
686. The stem is made, as usual, by adding a to the strong present-stem: thus, yunája,
ruṇádha. Below are given as if made

from √yuj all the forms for which examples have been noted as actually occurring in the older
language.
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
yunájāni
yunájāva
yunájāma
yunajāi
yunájāmahāi
2
yunájas
yunajādhvāi
3
yunájat
yunájatas
yunájan
yunájate
687. The RV. has once añjatas, which is anomalous as being made from the weak tense-
stem. Forms with double mode-sign are met with: thus, tṛṇáhān (AV.), rādhnávāt and yunajān
(ÇB.); and the only quotable example of 3d du. act. (besides añjatás) is hinásātas (ÇB.). ÇB. has
also hinasāvas as 1st du. act.: an elsewhere unexampled form.
3. Present Optative.
688. The optative is made, as elsewhere, by adding the compounded mode-endings to the
weak form of present-stem. Thus:
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
युाम्
yuñjyā́m
युाव
yuñjyā́va
युाम
yuñjyā́ma
युीय
yuñjīyá
युीविह
yuñjīváhi
युीमिह
yuñjīmáhi
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
a. AB. has once the anomalous 1st sing. act. vṛñjīyam. And forms like bhuñjīyām -yāt,
yuñjīyāt, are here and there met with in the epics ( bhuñjīyātām once in GGS.). MBh., too, has
once bhuñjītam.
4. Present Imperative.
689. In this class (as the roots all end in consonants) the ending of the 2d sing. act. is
always िध dhi.
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
युनजािन
yunájāni
युनजाव
yunájāva
युनजाम
yunájāma
युनजै
yunájāi
युनजावहै
yunájāvahāi
युनजामहै
yunájāmahāi
2
युि
yun̄gdhí
युम्
yun̄ktám
यु
yun̄ktá
यु
yun̄kṣvá
युाथाम्
yuñjā́thām
युम्
yun̄gdhvám
3
युनु
yunáktu
युाम्
yun̄ktā́m
युु
yuñjántu
युाम्
yun̄ktā́m
युाताम्
yuñjā́tām
युताम्
yuñjátām

690. There is no occurrence, so far as noted, of the ending tāt in verbs of this class. The
Veda has, as usual, sometimes strong forms, and sometimes the ending tana, in the 2d pl. act.:
thus, unátta, yunákta, anaktana, pinaṣṭana.
5. Present Participle.
691. The participles are made in this class as in the preceding ones: thus, act. यु् yuñjánt
(fem. युती yuñjatī́); mid. युान yuñjāná (but RV. has índhāna).
6. Imperfect.
692. The example of the regular inflection of this tense needs no introduction:
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
अयुनजम्
áyunajam
अयु
áyuñjva
अयुम
áyuñjma
अयुि
áyuñji
अयुिह
áyuñjvahi
अयुमिह
áyuñjmahi
2
अयुनक
áyunak
अयुम्
áyun̄ktam
अयु
áyun̄kta
अयुथास्
áyun̄kthās
अयुाथाम्
áyuñjāthām
अयुम्
áyun̄gdhvam
3
अयुनक
áyunak
अयुाम्
áyun̄ktām
अयुन्
áyuñjan
अयु
áyun̄kta
अयुाताम्
áyuñjātām
अयुत
áyuñjata
a. The endings s and t are necessarily lost in the nasal class throughout in 2d and 3d sing.
act., unless saved at the expense of the final radical consonant: which is a case of very rare
occurrence (the only quotable examples were given at 555 a).
693. The Veda shows no irregularities in this tense. Occurrences of augmentless forms are
found, especially in 2d and 3d sing. act., showing an accent like that of the present: for
example, bhinát, pṛṇák, vṛṇák, piṇák, riṇák.
a. The 1st sing. act. atṛṇam and acchinam (for atṛṇadam and acchinadam) were noted
above, at 555 a.
694. The roots of this class number about thirty, more than half of them being found only in
the earlier language; no new ones make their first appearance later. Three of them, añj and
bhañj and hiṅs, carry their nasal also into other tense-systems than the present. Two, ṛdh and
ubh, make present-systems also of other classes having a nasal in the class-sign: thus, ṛdhnoti
(nu-class) and ubhnāti (nā-class).

a. Many of the roots make forms from secondary a-stems: thus, from añja, unda, umbhá,
chinda, tṛṅhá, piṅṣa, pṛñcá, bhuñja, rundha, çiṅṣá, etc.
Irregularities of the Nasal Class.
695. The root tṛh combines tṛṇah with ti, tu, etc. into tṛṇeḍhi, tṛṇéḍhu; and, according to
the grammarians, has also such forms as tṛṇehmi: see above, 224 b.
696. The root hiṅs (by origin apparently a desiderative from √han) accents irregularly the
root-syllable in the weak forms: thus, híṅsanti, híṅste, híṅsāna (but hinásat etc. and hiṅsyā́t
ÇB.).
IV. Nu- and u-classes (fifth and eighth, su- and tan-classes).
697. A. The present-stem of the nu-class is made by adding to the root the syllable नु nu,
which then in the strong forms receives the accent, and is strengthened to नो nó.
B. The few roots of the u-class (about half-a-dozen) end in न् n, with the exception of the
later irregular  kṛ (or kar) — for which, see below, 714. The two classes, then, are closely
correspondent in form; and they are wholly accordant in inflection.
a. The u of either class-sign is allowed to be dropped before v and m of the 1st du. and 1st
pl. endings, except when the root (nu-class) ends in a consonant; and the u before a vowel-
ending becomes v or uv, according as it is preceded by one or by two consonants (129 a).
1. Present Indicative.
698. Examples of inflection: A. nu-class; root सु su press out: strong form of stem, सुनो sunó;
weak form, सुनु sunu.
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
सुनोिम
sunómi
सुनुवस्
sunuvás
सुनुमस्
sunumás
सुे
sunvé
सुनुवहे
sunuváhe
सुनुमहे
sunumáhe
2
सुनोिष
sunóṣi
सुनुथस्
sunuthás
सुनुथ
sunuthá
सुनुषे
sunuṣé
सुाथे
sunvā́the
सुनुे
sunudhvé

3
सुनोित
sunóti
सुनुतस्
sunutás
सुि
sunvánti
सुनुते
sunuté
सुाते
sunvā́te
सुते
sunváte
a. The forms sunvás, sunmás, sunváhe, sunmáhe are alternative with those given here for
1st du. and pl., and in practice are more common. From √āp, however (for example), only the
forms with u can occur: thus, āpnuvás, āpnumáhe; and also only āpnuvánti, āpnuvé, āpnuváte.
B. u-class; root तन् tan stretch: strong form of stem, तनो tanó; weak, तनु tanu.
1
तनोिम
tanómi
तस्
tanvás
तस्
tanmás
ते
tanvé
तहे
tanváhe
तहे
tanmáhe
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
b. The inflection is so precisely like that given above that it is not worth writing out in full.
The abbreviated forms in 1st du. and pl. are presented here, instead of the fuller, which rarely
occur (as no double consonant ever precedes).
699. a. In the older language, no strong 2d persons du. or pl., and no thana-endings, chance
to occur (but they are numerous in the impv. and impf.: see below). The RV. has several cases
of the irregular accent in 3d pl. mid.: thus, kṛṇvaté, tanvaté, manvaté, vṛṇvaté, spṛṇvaté .
b. In RV. occur also several 3d pl. mid. in ire from present-stems of this class: thus, invire,
ṛṇvire, pinvire, çṛṇviré, sunviré, hinviré. Of these, pinvire and hinviré might be perfects without
reduplication from the secondary roots pinv and hinv (below, 716). The 2d sing. mid. (with
passive value) çṛṇviṣé (RV.) is of anomalous and questionable character.
2. Present Subjunctive.
700. The subjunctive mode-stem is made in the usual manner, by adding a to the gunated
and accented class-sign: thus, sunáva, tanáva. In the following scheme are given all the forms
of which examples have been met with in actual use in the older language from either division
of the class; some of them are quite numerously represented there.
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
sunávāni
sunávāva
sunávāma
sunávāi
sunávāvahāi
sunávāmahāi
2
sunávas
sunávatha
sunávase
sunávāithe
3
sunávat
sunávan
sunávate
sunávātāi
sunávanta

701. Of the briefer 1st sing. act., RV. has kṛṇavā and hinavā. Forms with double mode-sign
occur (not in RV.): thus, kṛṇávāt and karavāt (AV.); açnavātha (K.), kṛṇavātha (VS.; but -vatha in
Kāṇva-text), karavātha (ÇB.). On the other hand, açnavatāi is found once (in TS.). Forms like
āpnuvāni, ardhnúvat, açnuvat, met with now and then in the older texts, are doubtless to be
regarded as false readings. RV. has in a single passage kṛṇvāíte (instead of kṛṇávāite); the only
form in āithe is açnávāithe.
3. Present Optative.
702. The combined endings (566) are added, as usual, to the weak tense-stem: thus,
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
सुनुयाम्
sunuyā́m
सुनुयाव
sunuyā́va
सुनुयाम
sunuyā́ma
सुीय
sunvīyá
सुीविह
sunvīváhi
सुीमिह
sunvīmáhi
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
a. From √āp, the middle optative would be āpnuvīyá — and so in other like cases.
4. Present Imperative.
703. The inflection of the imperative is in general like that in the preceding classes. As
regards the 2d sing. act., the rule of the later language is that the ending िह hi is taken
whenever the root itself ends in a consonant; otherwise, the tense- (or mode-) stem stands by
itself as 2d person (for the earlier usage, see below, 704). An example of inflection is:
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
सुनवािन
sunávāni
सुनवाव
sunávāva
सुनवाम
sunávāma
सुनवै
sunávāi
सुनवावहै
sunávāvahāi
सुनवामहै
sunávāmahāi
2
सुनु
sunú
सुनुतम्
sunutám
सुनुत
sunutá
सुनु
sunuṣvá
सुाथाम्
sunvā́thām
सुनुम्
sunudhvám
3
सुनोतु
sunótu
सुनुताम्
sunutā́m
सुु
sunvántu
सुनुताम्
sunutā́m
सुाताम्
sunvā́tām
सुताम्
sunvátām

a. From √āp, the 2d sing. act. would be āpnuhí; from √aç açnuhí; from √dhṛṣ, dhṛṣṇuhí; and
so on. From √āp, too, would be made āpnuvántu, āpnuvā́thām, āpnuvā́tām, āpnuvátām .
704. In the earliest language, the rule as to the omission of hi after a root with final vowel
does not hold good: in RV., such forms as inuhi, kṛṇuhí, cinuhí, dhūnuhi, çṛṇuhí, spṛṇuhi, hinuhi ,
and tanuhi, sanuhi, are nearly thrice as frequent in use as inú, çṛṇu, sunú, tanu , and their like;
in AV., however, they are only one sixth as frequent; and in the Brāhmaṇas they appear only
sporadically: even çṛṇudhí (with dhi) occurs several times in RV. RV. has the 1st sing. act.
hinavā. The ending tāt is found in kṛṇutāt and hinutāt, and kurutāt. The strong stem-form is
found in 2d du. act. in hinotam and kṛṇotam; and in 2d pl. act. in kṛṇóta and kṛṇótana, çṛṇóta
and çṛṇotana, sunóta and sunótana, hinóta and hinotana, and tanota, karóta. The ending tana
occurs only in the forms just quoted.
5. Present Participle.
705. The endings अ् ánt and आन āná are added to the weak form of tense stem: thus, from
√सु su come act. सु् sunvánt (fem. सुती sunvatī́), mid. सुान sunvāná; from √तन् tan, त्
tanvánt (fem. तती tanvatī́), तान tanvāná. From √आप् āp, they are आुव् āpnuvánt and आुवान
āpnuvāná.
6. Imperfect.
706. The combination of augmented stem and endings is according to the rules already
stated: thus,
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
असुनवम्
ásunavam
असुनुव
ásunuva
असुनुम
ásunuma
असुि
ásunvi
असुनुविह
ásunuvahi
असुनुमिह
ásunumahi
2
असुनोस्
ásunos
असुनुतम्
ásunutam
असुनुत
ásunuta
असुनुथास्
ásunuthās
असुाथाम्
ásunvāthām
असुनुम्
ásunudhvam
3
असुनोत्
ásunot
असुनुताम्
ásunutām
असुन्
ásunvan
असुनुत
ásunuta
असुाताम्
ásunvātām
असुत
ásunvata
a. Here, as elsewhere, the briefer forms ásunva, ásunma, ásunvahi, ásunmahi are allowed,
and more usual, except from roots with final consonant, as dhṛṣ: which makes, for example,
always ádhṛṣṇuma 
etc., 
and 
also ádhṛṣṇuvan, ádhṛṣṇuvi, ádhṛṣṇuvāthām, ádhṛṣṇuvātām,
ádhṛṣṇuvata.

707. Strong stem-forms and tana-ending are found only in RV., In akṛṇota, akṛṇotana.
Augmentless forms with accent are minván, ṛṇutá.
708. About fifty roots make, either exclusively or in part, their present-forms after the
manner of the nu-class: half of them do so only in the older language; three or four, only in the
later.
a. As to transfers to the a-conjugation, see below, 716.
709. The roots of the other division, or of the u-class, are extremely few, not exceeding
eight, even including tṛ on account of taruté RV., and han on account of the occurrence of
hanomi once in a Sūtra (PGS. i. 3. 27). BR. refer the stem inu to in of the u-class instead of i
of the nu-class.
Irregularities of the nu and u-classes.
710. The root tṛp be pleased is said by the grammarians to retain the n of its class-sign
unlingualized in the later language — where, however, forms of conjugation of this class are
very rare; while in the Veda the regular change is made: thus, tṛpṇu.
711. The root çru hear is contracted to çṛ before the class-sign, forming çṛṇó and çṛṇu as
stem. Its forms çṛṇviṣé and çṛṇviré have been noted above (699 b).
712. The root dhū shake in the later language (and rarely in B. and S.) shortens its vowel,
making the stem-forms dhunó and dhunu (earlier dhūnó, dhūnu).
713. The so-called root ūrṇu, treated by the native grammarians as dissyllabic and belonging
to the root-class (I.), is properly a present-stem of this class, with anomalous contraction, from
the root vṛ (or var). In the Veda, it has no forms which are not regularly made according to the
nu-class; but in the Brāhmaṇa language are found sometimes such forms as ūrṇāuti, as if from
an u-root of the root class (626); and the grammarians make for it a perfect, aorist, future, etc.
Its 2d sing. impv. act. is ūrṇu or ūrṇuhi; its impf., āúrṇos, āurṇot; its opt. mid., ūrṇuvīta (K.) or
ūrṇvītá (TS.).
714. The extremely common root  kṛ (or kar) make is in the later language inflected in the
present-system exclusively according to the u-class (being the only root of that class not ending
in न् n). It has the irregularity that in the strong form of stem it (as well as the class-sign) has
the guṇa-strengthening, and that in the weak form it is

changed to kur, so that the two forms of stem are करो karó and क kuru. The class-sign उ u is
always dropped before of व् v and म् m of the 1st du. and pl., and also before य् y of the opt.
act. Thus:
1. Present Indicative.
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
करोिम
karómi
कवस्
kurvás
कमस्
kurmás
कव
kurvé
कवहे
kurváhe
कमहे
kurmáhe
2
करोिष
karóṣi
कथस्
kuruthás
कथ
kuruthá
कषे
kuruṣé
कवाथे
kurvā́the
के
kurudhvé
3
करोित
karóti
कतस्
kurutás
कवि
kurvánti
कते
kuruté
कवाते
kurvā́te
कवते
kurváte
2. Present Optative.
1
कयाम्
kuryā́m
कयाव
kuryā́va
कयाम
kuryā́ma
कवय
kurvīyá
कवविह
kurvīváhi
कवमिह
kurvīmáhi
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
3. Present Imperative.
1
करवािण
karávāṇi
करवाव
karávāva
करवाम
karávāma
करवै
karávāi
करवावहै
karávāvahāi
करवामहै
karávāmahāi
2
क
kurú
कतम्
kurutám
कत
kurutá
क
kuruṣvá
कवाथाम्
kurvā́thām
कम्
kurudhvám
3
करोतु
karótu
कताम्
kurutā́m
कवु
kurvántu
कताम्
kurutā́m
कवाताम्
kurvā́tām
कवताम्
kurvátām
4. Present Participle.
कव् kurvánt (fem. कवती kurvatī́) कवाण kurvāṇá
5. Imperfect.
1
अकरवम्
ákaravam
अकव
ákurva
अकम
ákurma
अकव
ákurvi
अकविह
ákurvahi
अकमिह
ákurmahi
2
अकरोस्
ákaros
अकतम्
ákurutam
अकत
ákuruta
अकथास्
ákuruthās
अकवाथाम्
ákurvāthām
अकम्
ákurudhvam
3
अकरोत्
ákarot
अकताम्
ákurutām
अकवन्
ákurvan
अकत
ákuruta
अकवाताम्
ákurvātām
अकवत
ákurvata

715. In RV., this root is regularly inflected in the present-system according to the nu-class,
making the stem-forms kṛṇó and kṛṇu; the only exceptions are kurmas once and kuru twice (all
in the tenth book); in AV., the nu-forms are still more than six times as frequent as the u-forms
(nearly half of which, moreover, are in prose passages); but in the Brāhmaṇa language and
later, the u-forms are used to the exclusion of the others.
a. As 1st sing. pres. act. is found kurmi in the epos.
b. What irregular forms from kṛ as a verb of the nu-class occur in the older language have
been already noticed above.
c. The isolated form taruté, from √tṛ, shows an apparent analogy with these u-forms from kṛ.
716. A few verbs belonging originally to these classes have been shifted, in part or
altogether, to the a-class, their proper class-sign having been stereotyped as a part of the root.
a. Thus, in RV. we find forms both from the stem inu (√i or in), and also from ínva,
representing a derivative quasi-root inv (and these latter alone occur in AV.). So likewise forms
from a stem ṛṇva beside those from ṛṇu (√ṛ); and from hinva beside those from hinu (√hi). The
so-called roots jinv and pinv are doubtless of the same origin, although no forms from the stem
pinu are met with at any period — unless pinvire (above, 699 b) be so regarded; and AV. has
the participle pinvánt, f. pinvatī́. The grammarians set up a root dhinv, but only forms from dhi
(stem dhinu) appear to occur in the present-system (the aorist adhinvīt is found in PB.).
b. Occasional a-forms are met with also from other roots: thus, cinvata etc., dunvasva.
V. Nā-class (ninth or krī-class).
717. The class-sign of this class is in the strong forms the syllable ना nā́, accented, which is
added to the root; in the weak forms, or where the accent falls upon the ending, it is नी nī; but
before the initial vowel of an ending the ई ī of नी nī disappears altogether.
1. Present Indicative.
718. Example of inflection: root ी krī buy: strong form of stem, ीणा krīṇā́; weak form, ीणी
krīṇī (before a vowel, ीण् krīṇ).

active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
ीणािम
krīṇā́mi
ीणीवस्
krīṇīvás
ीणीमस्
krīṇīmás
ीणे
krīṇé
ीणीवहे
krīṇīváhe
ीणीमहे
krīṇīmáhe
2
ीणािस
krīṇā́si
ीणीथस्
krīṇīthás
ीणीथ
krīṇīthá
ीणीषे
krīṇīṣe
ीणाथे
krīṇā́the
ीणीे
krīṇīdhvé
3
ीणाित
krīṇā́ti
ीणीतस्
krīṇītás
ीणि
krīṇánti
ीणीते
krīṇīté
ीणाते
krīṇā́te
ीणते
krīṇáte
719. In the Veda, the 3d sing. mid. has the same form with the 1st in gṛṇé; the peculiar
accent of 3d pl. mid. is seen in punaté and riṇaté; and vṛṇīmahé (beside vṛṇīmáhe) occurs once
in RV.
2. Present Subjunctive.
720. The subjunctive forms which have been found exemplified in Veda and Brāhmaṇa are
given below. The subjunctive mode-stem is, of course, indistinguishable in form from the strong
tense-stem. And the 2d and 3d sing. act. (with secondary endings) are indistinguishable from
augmentless imperfects.
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
krīṇāni
krīṇā́ma
krīṇāí
krīṇāvahāi
krīṇāmahāi
2
krīṇā́s
krīṇātha
krīṇāsāi
3
krīṇā́t
krīṇā́n
krīṇātāi
krīṇāntāi
3. Present Optative.
721. This mode is formed and inflected with entire regularity; owing to the fusion of tense-
sign and mode-sign in the middle, some of its persons are indistinguishable from augmentless
imperfects. Its first persons are as follows:
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
ीणीयाम्
krīṇīyā́m
ीणीयाव
krīṇīyā́va
ीणीयाम
krīṇīyā́ma
ीणीय
krīṇīyá
ीणीविह
krīṇīváhi
ीणीमिह
krīṇīmáhi
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
4. Present Imperative.
722. The ending in 2d sing. act., as being always preceded by a vowel, is िह hi (never िध
dhi); and there are no examples of an omission of it. But this person is forbidden

to be formed in the classical language from roots ending in a consonant; for both class-sign and
ending is substituted the peculiar ending आन āná.
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
ीणािन
krīṇā́ni
ीणाव
krīṇā́va
ीणाम
krīṇā́ma
ीणै
krīṇāí
ीणावहै
krīṇā́vahāi
ीणामहै
krīṇā́mahāi
2
ीणीिह
krīṇīhí
ीणीतम्
krīṇītám
ीणीत
krīṇītá
ीणी
krīṇīṣvá
ीणाथाम्
krīṇā́thām
ीणीम्
krīṇīdhvám
3
ीणातु
krīṇā́tu
ीणीताम्
krīṇītā́m
ीणु
krīṇántu
ीणीताम्
krīṇītā́m
ीणाताम्
krīṇā́tām
ीणताम्
krīṇátām
a. Examples of the ending āná in 2d sing. act. are açāna, gṛhāṇá, badhāná, stabhāná .
723. The ending āna is known also to the earliest language; of the examples just given, all
are found in AV., and the first two in RV.; others are iṣāṇa, muṣāṇa, skabhāna. But AV. has
also gṛbhṇīhi (also AB.), and even gṛhṇāhi, with strong stem; BhP. has badhnīhi. Strong stems
are farther found in gṛṇāhi and stṛṇāhi (TS.), pṛṇāhi (TB.), and çrīṇāhi (Āpast.), and, with
anomalous accent, punāhí and çṛṇāhí (SV.); and, in 2d pl. act., in punā́ta (RV.). The ending tāt
of 2d sing. act. occurs in gṛhṇītāt, jānītā́t, punītāt. The ending tana is found in punītána,
pṛṇītana, çrīṇītana.
5. Present Participle.
724. The participles are regularly formed: thus, for example, act. ीण् krīṇánt (fem. ीणती
krīṇatī́); mid. ीणान krīṇāná.
6. Imperfect.
725. There is nothing special to be noted as to the inflection of this tense: an example is —
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
अीणाम्
ákrīṇām
अीणीव
ákrīṇīva
अीणीम
ákrīṇīma
अीिण
ákrīṇi
अीणीविह
ákrīṇīvahi
अीणीमिह
ákrīṇīmahi
2
अीणास्
ákrīṇās
अीणीतम्
ákrīṇītam
अीणीत
ákrīṇīta
अीणीथास्
ákrīṇīthās
अीणाथाम्
ákrīṇāthām
अीणीम्
ákrīṇīdhvam
3
अीणात्
ákrīṇāt
अीणीताम्
ákrīṇītām
अीणन्
ákrīṇan
अीणीत
ákrīṇīta
अीणाताम्
ákrīṇātām
अीणत
ákrīṇata

726. It has been pointed out above that augmentless persons of this tense are in part
indistinguishable in form from subjunctive and optative persons. Such as certainly belong here
are (in V.) kṣiṇām; açnan, riṇán; gṛbhṇata, vṛṇata. The AV. has once minīt instead of mināt.
MBh. has açnīs after mā.
a. AB. has the false form ajānīmas, and in AA. occurs avṛṇīta as 3d plural.
727. The roots which form their present-systems, wholly or in part, after the manner of this
class, are over fifty in number: but, for about three fifths of them, the forms are quotable only
from the older language, and for half-a-dozen they make their first appearance later; for less
than twenty are they in use through the whole life of the language, from the Veda down.
a. As to secondary a-stems, see 731.
Irregularities of the na-class.
728. a. The roots ending in ū shorten that vowel before the class-sign: thus, from √pū,
punā́ti and punīté; in like manner also jū, dhū, lū.
b. The root vlī (B.S.) forms either vlīnā or vlinā.
729. The root grabh or grah (the former Vedic) is weakened to gṛbh or gṛh.
a. As the perfect also in weak forms has gṛbh or gṛh, it is not easy to see why the
grammarians should not have written ṛ instead of ra in the root.
730. a. A few of the roots have a more or less persistent nasal in forms outside the present-
system; such are without nasal before the class-sign: thus, grath or granth, badh or bandh,
math or manth, skabh or skambh, stabh or stambh.
b. The root jñā also loses its nasal before the class-sign: thus, jānā́ti, jānīté.
731. Not rarely, forms showing a transfer to the a-conjugation are met with: thus, even in
RV., minati, minat, aminanta, from √mi; in AV., çṛṇa from √çṛ; later, gṛhṇa, jāna, prīṇa, mathna,
etc. And from roots pṛ and mṛ are formed the stems pṛṇá and mṛṇá, which are inflected after
the manner of the á-class, as if from roots pṛṇ and mṛṇ.
732. In the Veda, an apparently denominative inflection of a stem in āyá is not infrequent
beside the conjugation of roots of this class: thus, gṛbhāyá, mathāyáti, açrathāyas, skabhāyáta,
astabhāyat, pruṣāyánte, muṣāyát, and so on. See below, 1066 b.

Second or a-Conjugation.
733. We come now to the classes which compose the Second or a-Conjugation. These are
more markedly similar in their mode of inflection than the preceding classes; their common
characteristics, already stated, may be here repeated in summary. They are: 1. A final a in the
present-stem; 2. a constant accent, not changing between stem and ending; 3. a briefer form of
the optative mode-sign in the active, namely ī instead of yā (combining in both voices alike with
a to e); 4. the absence of any ending (except when tāt is used) in 2d sing. impv. act.; 5. the
conversion of initial ā of the 2d and 3d du. mid. endings to e; 6. the use of the full endings
ante, anta, antām in 3d pl. mid. forms; 7. the invariable use of an (not us) in 3d pl. impf. act.;
8. and the use of māna instead of āna as ending of the mid. pple. Moreover, 9. the stem-final a
becomes ā before m and v of 1st personal endings — but not before am of 1st sing. impf.:
here, as before the 3d pl. endings, the stem-final is lost, and the short a of the ending remains
(or the contrary): thus, bhávanti (bháva+anti), bhávante (bháva+ante), ábhavam (ábhava+am).
a. All these characteristics belong not to the inflection of the a-present-systems alone, but
also to that of the a-, reduplicated, and sa-aorists, the s-future, and the desiderative, causative,
and denominative present-systems. That is to say, wherever in conjugation an a-stem is found, it
is inflected in the same manner.
VI. A-class (first, bhū-class).
734. The present-stem of this class is made by adding अ a to the root, which has the
accent, and, when that is possible (235, 240), is strengthened to guṇa. Thus, भव bháva from √भू
bhū; जय jáya from √िज ji; बोध bódha from √बुध् budh; सप sárpa from √प् sṛp; — but वद váda from
√व vad; ीड krī́ḍa from √ीड krīḍ.

1. Present Indicative.
735. The endings and the rules for their combination with the stem have been already fully
given, for this and the other parts of the present-system; and it only remains to illustrate them
by examples.
a. Example of inflection: root भू bhū be; stem भव bháva (bho+a: 131).
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
भवािम
bhávāmi
भवावस्
bhávāvas
भवामस्
bhávāmas
भवे
bháve
भवावहे
bhávāvahe
भवामहे
bhávāmahe
2
भविस
bhávasi
भवथस्
bhávathas
भवथ
bhávatha
भवसे
bhávase
भवेथे
bhávethe
भवे
bhávadhve
3
भवित
bhávati
भवतस्
bhávatas
भवि
bhávanti
भवते
bhávate
भवेते
bhávete
भवे
bhávante
b. The V. has but a single example of the thana-ending, namely vádathana (and no other in
any class of this conjugation). The 1st pl. mid. manāmahé (RV., once) is probably an error. RV.
has çóbhe once as 3d singular.
2. Present Subjunctive.
736. The mode-stem is bhávā (bháva+a). Subjunctive forms of this conjugation are very
numerous in the older language; the following scheme instances all that have been found to
occur.
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
bhávāni
bhávāva
bhávāma
bhávāi
bhávāvahāi
bhávāmahāi
2
bhávāsi
bhávās
bhávāthas
bhávātha
bhávāse
bhávāsāi
bhávādhvāi
3
bhávāti
bhávāt
bhávātas
bhávān
bhávāte
bhávātāi
bhávāite
bhávanta
bhávāntāi
737. The 2d du. mid. ( bhávāithe) does not chance to occur in this class; and yátāite is the
only example of the 3d person. No such pl. mid. forms as bhávādhve, bhávānte are made from
any class with stem-final a; such as bhávanta (which are very common) are, of course, properly
augmentless imperfects. The Brāhmaṇas (especially ÇB.) prefer the 2d sing. act. in āsi and the
3d in āt. AB. has the 3d sing. mid. haratāi; and a 3d pl. in antāi (vartantāi KB.) has been noted
once. RV. has examples, arcā and madā, of the briefer 1st. sing. act.

3. Present Optative.
738. The scheme of optative endings as combined with the final of an a-stem was given in
full above (566).
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
भवेयम्
bháveyam
भवेव
bháveva
भवेम
bhávema
भवेय
bháveya
भवेविह
bhávevahi
भवेमिह
bhávemahi
2
भवेस्
bháves
भवेतम्
bhávetam
भवेत
bháveta
भवेथास्
bhávethās
भवेयाथाम्
bháveyāthām
भवेम्
bhávedhvam
3
भवेत्
bhávet
भवेताम्
bhávetām
भवेयुस्
bháveyus
भवेत
bháveta
भवेयाताम्
bháveyātām
भवेरन्
bháveran
a. The RV. has once the 3d pl. mid. bharerata (for one other example, see 752 b). AV. has
udeyam from √vad.
b. A few instances are met with of middle 3d persons from a-stems in īta and (very rarely)
īran, instead of eta and eran. For convenience, they may be put together here (excepting the
more numerous causative forms, for which see 1043 c); they are (so far as noted) these: nayīta
S. and later, çaṅsīta S., çrayīta S.; dhayīta S., dhyāyīta U., hvayīta AB. S. and hvayīran S.,
dhmāyīta U. An active form çaṅsīyāt C. is isolated and anomalous.
4. Present Imperative.
739. An example of the imperative inflection is:
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
भवािन
bhávāni
भवाव
bhávāva
भवाम
bhávāma
भवै
bhávāi
भवावहै
bhávāvahāi
भवामहै
bhávāmahāi
2
भव
bháva
भवतम्
bhávatam
भवत
bhávata
भव
bhávasva
भवेथाम्
bhávethām
भवम्
bhávadhvam
3
भवतु
bhávatu
भवताम्
bhávatām
भवु
bhávantu
भवताम्
bhávatām
भवेताम्
bhávetām
भवाम्
bhávantām
740. The ending tana in 2d pl. act. is as rare in this whole conjugation as is thana in the
present: the V. affords only bhajatana in the a-class (and nahyatana in the ya-class: 760 c). The
ending tāt of 2d sing. act., on the other hand, is not rare; the RV. has avatāt, oṣatāt, dahatāt,
bhavatāt, yacchatāt, yācatāt, rákṣatāt, vahatāt; to which AV. adds jinvatāt, dhāvatāt; and the
Brāhmanas bring other examples. MS. has twice svadātu (parallel texts both times svadāti):
compare similar cases in the á-class: 752 c.

5. Present Participle
741. The endings अ् ant and मान māna are added to the present-stem, with loss, before the
former, of the final stem-vowel: thus, act. भव् bhávant (fem. भवी bhávantī); mid. भवमान
bhávamāna.
a. A small number of middle participles appear to be made from stems of this class (as of
other a-classes: see 752 e, 1043 f) by the suffix āna instead of māna: thus, namāna, pacāna,
çikṣāṇa, svajāna, hvayāna (all epic), majjāna and kaṣāṇa (later); and there are Vedic examples
(as cyávāna, prathāná, yátāna or yatāná, çúmbhāna, all RV.) of which the character, whether
present or aorist, is doubtful: compare 840, 852.
6. Imperfect.
742. An example of the imperfect inflection is:
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
अभवम्
ábhavam
अभवाव
ábhavāva
अभवाम
ábhavāma
अभवे
ábhave
अभवाविह
ábhavāvahi
अभवामिह
ábhavāmahi
अभवस्
ábhavas
अभवतम्
ábhavatam
अभवत
ábhavata
अभवथास्
ábhavathās
अभवेथाम्
ábhavethām
अभवम्
ábhavadhvam
अभवत्
ábhavat
अभवताम्
ábhavatām
अभवन्
ábhavan
अभवत
ábhavata
अभवेताम्
ábhavetām
अभव
ábhavanta
743. No forms in tana are made in this tense from any a-class. Examples of augmentless
forms (which are not uncommon) are: cyávam, ávas, dáhas, bódhat, bhárat, cáran, náçan;
bādhathās, várdhata, çócanta. The subjunctively used forms of 2d and 3d sing. act. are more
frequent than those of either of the proper subjunctive persons.
744. A far larger number of roots form their present-system according to the a-class than
according to any of the other classes: in the RV., they are about two hundred and forty (nearly
two fifths of the whole body of roots); in the AV., about two hundred (nearly the same
proportion); for the whole language, the proportion is still larger, or nearly one half the whole
number of present-stems: namely, over two hundred in both earlier and later language, one
hundred and seventy-five in the older alone, nearly a hundred and fifty in the later alone.
Among these are not a few transfers from the classes of the first conjugation: see those classes
above. There are no roots ending in long ā — except a few which make an a-stem in some
anomalous way: below, 749 a.

Irregularities of the a-class.
745. A few verbs have irregular vowel-changes in forming the present-stem: thus,
a. ūh consider has guṇa-strengthening (against 240): thus, óhate.
b. kṛp (or krap) lament, on the contrary, remains unchanged: thus, ḱṛ́pate.
c. guh hide has prolongation instead of guṇa: thus, ǵū́hati.
d . kram stride regularly lengthens its vowel in the active, but not in the middle: thus,
kŕā́mati, krámate; but the vowel-quantities are somewhat mixed up, even from the oldest
language down; — klam tire is said to form klāmati etc., but is not quotable; — cam with the
preposition ā rinse the mouth forms ́ā́cāmati.
e. In the later language are found occasional forms of this class from mṛj wipe; and they
show the same vṛddhi (instead of guṇa) which belongs to the root in its more proper inflection
(627): thus, mārjasva.
f. The grammarians give a number of roots in urv, which they declare to lengthen the u in
the present-stem. Only three are found in (quite limited) use, and they show no forms anywhere
with short u. All appear to be of secondary formation from roots in ṛ or ar. The root murch or
mūrch coagulate has likewise only ū in quotable forms.
g. The onomatopoetic root ṣṭhīv spew is written by the grammarians as ṣṭhiv, and declared
to lengthen its vowel in the present-system: compare 240 b.
746. The roots daṅç bite, rañj color, sañj hang, svañj embrace, of which the nasal is in
other parts of the conjugation not constant, lose it in the present-system: thus, dáçati etc.; sañj
forms both sajati and sajjati (probably for sajyati, or for sasjati from sasajati); math or manth
has mathati later. In general, as the present of this class is a strengthening formation, a root
that has such a nasal anywhere has it here also.
747. The roots gam go and yam reach make the present-stems gáccha and yáccha: thus,
gácchāmi etc.: see 608.
748. The root sad sit forms śī́da (conjectured to be contracted from sisda for sisada: thus,
śī́dāmi etc.
749. Transfers to this class from other classes are not rare, as has been already pointed out
above, both throughout the present-system and in occasional forms. The most important cases
are the following:
a. The roots in ā, sthā stand, pā drink, and ghrā smell, form the present-stems tíṣṭha
(tíṣṭhāmi etc.), píba (píbāmi etc.), and jíghra (jíghrāmi etc.): for these and other similar cases,
see 671–4.
b. Secondary root-forms like inv, jinv, pinv , from simpler roots

of the nu-class, are either found alongside their originals, or have crowded these out of use:
see 716.
750. On the other hand, the root dham or dhmā blow forms its present-stem from the more
original form of the root: thus, dhámati etc.
VII. Accented á-class (sixth, tud-class).
751. The present-stem of this class has the accent on the class-sign अ á, and the root
remains unstrengthened. In its whole inflection, it follows so closely the model of the preceding
class that to give the paradigm in full will be unnecessary (only for the subjunctive, all the
forms found to occur will be instanced).
752. Example of inflection: root िव viç enter; stem िवश viçá:
1. Present Indicative.
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
िवशािम
viçā́mi
िवशावस्
viçā́vas
िवशामस्
viçā́mas
िवशे
viçé
िवशावहे
viçā́vahe
िवशामहे
viçā́mahe
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
2. Present Subjunctive.
1
viçā́ni
viçā́va
viçā́ma
viçāí
viçā́vahāi
viçā́mahāi
2
viçā́si
viçā́s
viçā́tha
viçā́se
viçā́sāi
viçāíthe
3
viçā́ti
viçā́t
viçā́tas
viçā́n
viçā́te
viçā́tāi
viçāíte
viçā́ntāi
a. A single example of the briefer 1st sing. act. is mṛkṣā́. The only forms in āithe and āite
are pṛṇāíthe and yuvāíte.
3. Present Optative.
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
िवशेयम्
viçéyam
िवशेव
viçéva
िवशेम
viçéma
िवशेय
viçéya
िवशेविह
viçévahi
िवशेमिह
viçémahi
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
b. The RV. has the ending tana once in tiretana 2d pl. act., and rata in juṣerata 3d pl. mid.

4. Present Imperative.
The first persons having been given above as subjunctives, the second are added here:
2
िवश
viçá
िवशतम्
viçátam
िवशत
viçáta
िवश
viçásva
िवशेथाम्
viçéthām
िवशम्
viçádhvam
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
c. The ending tāt is found in RV. and AV. in mṛḍatāt, vṛhatāt, suvatāt; other examples are
not infrequent in the Brāhmaṇa language: thus, khidatāt, chyatāt, pṛcchatāt, viçatāt, sṛjatāt; and
later, spṛçatāt. The 3d sing. act nudātu and muñcātu occur in Sūtras (cf. 740).
5. Present Participle.
The active participle is िवश् viçánt; the middle is िवशमान viçámāna.
d. The feminine of the active participle is usually made from the strong stem-form: thus,
viçántī; but sometimes from the weak: thus, siñcántī and siñcatī́ (RV. and AV.), tudántī and
tudatī́ (AV.): see above, 449 d, e.
e. Middle participles in āna instead of māna are dhuvāná, dhṛṣāṇá, liçāna, çyāna , in the
older language; kṛçāna, muñcāna, spṛçāna  in the later (cf. 741 a).
6. Imperfect.
1
अिवशम्
áviçam
अिवशाव
áviçāva
अिवशाम
áviçāma
अिवशे
áviçe
अिवशाविह
áviçāvahi
अिवशामिह
áviçāmahi
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
f. Examples of augmentless forms accented are sṛjás, sṛját, tiránta.
g. The a-aorist (846 ff.) is in general the equivalent, as regards its forms, of an imperfect of
this class.
753. Stems of the á-class are made from nearly a hundred and fifty roots: for about a third
of these, in both the earlier and the later language; for a half, in the earlier only; for the
remainder, nearly twenty, only in the later language. Among them are a number of transfers
from the classes of the non-a-conjugation.
a. In some of these transfers, as pṛṇ and mṛṇ (731), there takes place almost a setting-up of
independent roots.
b. The stems icchá, ucchá, and ṛcchá are reckoned as belonging respectively to the roots iṣ
desire, vas shine, and ṛ go.
c. The roots written by the Hindu grammarians with final o — namely, cho, do, ço, and so
— and forming the present-stems chyá,

dyá, çyá, syá, are more properly (as having an accented á in the stem) to be reckoned to this
class than to the ya-class, where the native classification puts them (see 761 g). They appear to
be analogous with the stems kṣya, sva, hva, noted below (755).
754. The roots from which á-stems are made have certain noticeable peculiarities of form.
Hardly any of them have long vowels, and none have long interior vowels; very few have final
vowels; and none (save two or three transfers, and √lajj be ashamed, which does not occur in
any accentuated text, and is perhaps to be referred rather to the a-class) have a as radical
vowel, except as this forms a combination with r, which is then reduced with it to ṛ or some of
the usual substitutes of ṛ.
Irregularities of the á-class.
755. The roots in i and u and ū change those vowels into iy and uv before the class-sign:
thus, kṣiyá, yuvá, ruvá; suvá , etc.; and sva, hva occur, instead of suva and huva, in the older
language, while TS. has the participle kṣyánt. K. has dhūva from √dhū.
756. The three roots in ṛ form the present-stems kirá, girá (also gila) , tirá, and are
sometimes written as kir etc.; and gur, jur, tur are really only varieties of gṛ, jṛ, tṛ; and bhur
and sphur are evidently related with other ar or ṛ root-forms.
a. The common root prach ask makes the stem pṛcchá.
757. As to the stems -driyá and -priyá, and mriyá and dhriyá, sometimes reckoned as
belonging to this class, see below, 773.
758. Although the present-stem of this class shows in general a weak form of the root, there
are nevertheless a number of roots belonging to it which are strengthened by a penultimate
nasal. Thus, the stem muñcá is made from √muc release; siñcá from √sic sprinkle; vindá from
√vid find; kṛntá from √kṛt cut; piṅçá from √piç adorn; tṛmpá from √tṛp enjoy; lumpá from √lup
break; limpá from √lip smear; and occasional forms of the same kind are met with from a few
others, as tunda from √tud thrust; bṛṅhá from √bṛh strengthen; dṛṅhá (beside dṛ́ṅha) from √dṛh
make firm; çumbhá (beside çúmbha) from √çubh shine; TS. has çṛnthati from √çrath (instead of
çrathnāti; uñcha, vindhá, sumbha, are of doubtful character.
a. Nasalized á-stems are also in several instances made by transfer from the nasal class:
thus, unda, umbha, ṛñjá, piṅṣá, yuñja, rundha, çiṅṣa .
VIII. Ya-class (fourth, div-class).
759. The present-stem of this class adds य ya to the accented but unstrengthened root. Its
inflection is also pre-

cisely like that of the a-class, and may be presented in the same abbreviated form as that of
the á-class.
760. Example of inflection: root न nah bind; stem न náhya.
1. Present Indicative.
1. Present Indicative.
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
नािम
náhyāmi
नावस्
náhyāvas
नामस्
náhyāmas
ने
náhye
नावहे
náhyāvahe
नामहे
náhyāmahe
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
2. Present Subjunctive.
1
náhyāni
náhyāma
náhyāi
náhyāvahāi
náhyāmahāi
2
náhyāsi
náhyās
náhyāsāi
náhyādhvāi
3
náhyāti
náhyāt
náhyātas
náhyān
náhyātāi
náhyāntāi
a. A 3d pl. mid. in antāi (jāyantāi) occurs once in TS.
3. Present Optative.
1
नेयम्
náhyeyam
नेव
náhyeva
नेम
náhyema
नेय
náhyeya
नेविह
náhyevahi
नेमिह
náhyemahi
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
b. For two or three 3d sing. mid. forms in īta (for eta), see 738 b.
4. Present Imperative.
2
न
náhya
नतम्
náhyatam
नत
náhyata
न
náhyasva
नेथाम्
náhyethām
नम्
náhyadhvam
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
c. Of the ending tana, RV. has one example, nahyatana; the ending tāt is found in asyatāt,
khyāyatāt, naçyatāt.
5. Present Participle.
The active participle is न् náhyant (fem. नी náhyantī); the middle is नमान náhyamāna.
6. Imperfect.
1
अनम्
ánahyam
अनव
ánahyava
अनाम
ánahyāma
अने
ánahye
अनाविह
ánahyāvahi
अनामिह
ánahyāmahi
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.

d. Examples of augmentless forms showing the accent belonging to the present-system are
gā́yat, páçyat, páçyan, jā́yathās.
761. The ya-class stems are more than a hundred and thirty in number, and nearly half of
them have forms in use in all periods of the language, about forty occurring only in the earlier,
and about thirty only in the modern period.
a. Of the roots making ya-stems, a very considerable part (over fifty) signify a state of
feeling, or a condition of mind or body: thus, kup be angry, klam be weary, kṣudh be hungry,
muh be confused, lubh be lustful, çuṣ be dry, etc. etc.
b. A further number have a more or less distinctly passive sense, and are in part evident
and in part presumable transfers from the passive or yá-class, with change of accent, and
sometimes also with assumption of active endings. It is not possible to draw precisely the limits
of the division; but there are in the older language a number of clear cases, in which the
accent wavers and changes, and the others are to be judged by analogy with them. Thus, √muc
forms múcyate once or twice, beside the usual mucyáte, in RV. and AV.; and in the Brāhmaṇas
the former is the regular accent. Similar changes are found also in ya-forms from other roots:
thus, from kṣi destroy, jī or jyā injure, tap heat, dṛh make firm, pac cook, pṛ fill, mī damage,
ric leave, lup break, hā leave. Active forms are early made from some of these, and they grow
more common later. It is worthy of special mention that, from the Veda down, jā́yate is born
etc. is found as altered passive or original ya-formation by the side of √jan give birth.
c. A considerable body of roots (about forty) differ from the above in having an apparently
original transitive or neuter meaning: examples are as throw, nah bind, paç see, pad go, çliṣ
clasp.
d. A number of roots, of various meaning, and of somewhat doubtful character and relations,
having present-stems ending in ya, are by the native grammarians written with final diphthongs,
āi or e or o. Thus:
e. Roots reckoned as ending in āi and belonging to the a- (or bhū-) class, as gāi sing
(gā́yati etc.). As these show abundantly, and for the most part exclusively, ā-forms outside the
present-system, there seems to be no good reason why they should not rather be regarded as
ā-roots of the ya-class. They are kṣā burn, gā sing, glā be weary, trā save, dhyā think, pyā fill
up, mlā relax, rā bark, vā be blown, çyā coagulate, çrā boil, styā stiffen. Some of them are
evident extensions of simpler roots by the addition of ā. The secondary roots tāy stretch (beside
tan), and cāy observe (beside ci) appear to be of similar character.
f. Roots reckoned as ending in e and belonging to the a- (or bhū-) class, as dhe suck
(dháyati etc.). These, too, have ā-forms, and sometimes ī-forms, outside the present system, and
are best regarded as ā-roots, either with ā weakened to a before the class-sign of this class, or
with ā

weakened to ī or i and inflected according to the a-class. They are dhā suck, mā exchange, vā
weave, vyā envelop, hvā call (secondary, from hū). As of kindred form may be mentioned day
share and vyay expend (probably denominative of vyaya).
g. A few roots artificially written with final o and reckoned to the ya-class, with radical
vowel lost before the class-sign: thus, do cut, bind, pres. dyáti etc. These, as having an
accented á in the sign, have plainly no right to be put in this class; and they are better
referred to the á-class (see above, 753 c). Outside the present-system they show ā- and i-forms;
and in that system the ya is often resolved into ia in the oldest language.
762. The ya-class is the only one thus far described which shows any tendency toward a
restriction to a certain variety of meaning. In this tendency, as well as in the form of its sign, it
appears related with the class of distinctly defined meaning which is next to be taken up — the
passive, with yá-sign. Though very far from being as widely used as the latter beside other
present-systems, it is in some cases an intransitive conjugation by the side of a transitive of
some other class.
Irregularities of the ya-class.
763. The roots of this class ending in am lengthen their vowel in forming the present-stem:
they are klam, tam, dam, bhram, çam be quiet, çram: for example, tā́myati, çrā́myati. From
kṣam, however, only kṣamyate occurs; and çam labor makes çamyati (B.).
764. The root mad has the same lengthening: thus, mā́dyati.
765. The roots in īv — namely, dīv, sīv, srīv or çrīv, and ṣṭhīv (from which no forms of this
class are quotable) — are written by the grammarians with iv, and a similar lengthening in the
present-system is prescribed for them.
a. They appear to be properly dīū etc., since their vocalized final in other forms is always ū;
dīv is by this proved to have nothing to do with the assumed root div shine, which changes to
dyu (361 d): compare 240 b.
766. From the roots jṛ and tṛ (also written as jur and tir or tur) come the stems jī́rya and
tī́rya, and jū́rya and tūrya (the last two only in RV.); from pṛ comes pū́rya.
767. The root vyadh is abbreviated to vidh: thus, vídhyati. And any root which in other
forms has a penultimate nasal loses it here: thus, dṛ́hya from dṛṅh or dṛh; bhraçya from bhraṅç
or bhraç; rajya from rañj or raj.

IX. Accented yá-class: Passive conjugation.
768. A certain form of present-stem, inflected with middle endings, is used only in a passive
sense, and is formed from all roots for which there is occasion to make a passive conjugation.
Its sign is an accented य yá added to the root: thus, ह hanyá from √ हन् han slay, आ āpyá
from √आप् āp obtain, गृहय grhyá from √गृ gṛh (or grah) seize: and so on, without any reference
to the class according to which the active and middle forms are made.
769. The form of the root to which the passive-sign is added is (since the accent is on the
sign) the weak one: thus, a penultimate nasal is dropped, and any abbreviation which is made
in the weak forms of the perfect (794), in the aorist optative (922 b), or before ta of the
passive participle (954), is made also in the passive present-system: thus, ajyá from √añj,
badhyá from √bandh, ucyá from √vac, ijyá from √yaj.
770. On the other hand, a final vowel of a root is in general liable to the same changes as
in other parts of the verbal system where it is followed by y: thus —
a. Final i and u are lengthened: thus, mīyá from √mi; sūyá from √su;
b. Final ā is usually changed to ī: thus, dīyá from √dā; hīyá from √hā: but jñāyá from √jñā,
and so khyāyá, khāyá, mnāyá, etc.;
c. Final ṛ is in general changed to ri: thus, kriyá from √kṛ; but if preceded by two
consonants (and also, it is claimed, in the root ṛ), it has instead the guṇa-strengthening: thus,
smaryá from √smṛ (the only quotable case); — and in those roots which show a change of ṛ to
ir and ur (so-called ṝ-verbs: see 242), that change is made here also, and the vowel is
lengthened: thus, çīrya from √çṛ, pūryá from √pṛ.
771. The inflectiom of the passive-stem is precisely like that of the other a-stems; it differs
only in accent from that of the class last given. It may be here presented, therefore, in the
same abbreviated form:
a. Example of inflection: root kṛ make; passive-stem िय kriyá:

1. Present Indicative.
s.
d.
p.
1
िये
kriyé
ियावहे
kriyā́vahe
ियामहे
kriyā́mahe
etc.
etc.
etc.
2. Present Subjunctive.
b. The forms noticed as occurring in the older language are alone here instanced:
s.
d.
p.
1
kriyāí
kriyā́mahāi
2
kriyā́dhvāi
3
kriyā́te
kriyā́tāi
kriyā́ntāi
c. The 3d pl. ending antāi is found once ( ucyantāi K.).
3. Present Optative.
1
ियेय
kriyéya
ियेविह
kriyévahi
ियेमिह
kriyémahi
etc.
etc.
etc.
d. No forms of the passive optative chance to occur in RV. or AV.; they are found, however,
in the Brāhmaṇas. ChU. has once dhmāyīta.
4. Present Imperative.
2
िय
kriyásva
ियेथाम्
kriyéthām
ियम्
kriyádhvam
etc.
etc.
etc.
5. Present Participle.
e. This is made with the suffix मान māna: thus, ियमाण kriyámāṇa.
f. In use, this participle is well distinguished from the other passive participle by its
distinctively present meaning: thus, kṛtá done, but kriyámāṇa in process of doing , or being
done.
6. Imperfect.
1
अिये
ákriye
अियाविह
ákriyāvahi
अियामिह
ákriyāmahi
etc.
etc.
etc.
g. The passive-sign is never resolved into ia in the Veda.
772. The roots tan and khan usually form their passives from parallel roots in ā: thus,
tāyáte, khāyáte (but also tanyate, khan-

yate); and dham, in like manner, makes either dhamyate or dhmāyáte. The corresponding form
to √jan, namely jā́yate (above, 761 b), is apparently a transfer to the preceding class.
773. By their form, mriyáte dies, and dhriyáte maintains itself, is steadfast , are passives
from the roots mṛ die and dhṛ hold; although neither is used in a proper passive sense, and mṛ
is not transitive except in the derivative form mṛṇ (above, 731). With them are to be compared
the stems ā-driyá heed and ā-priyá be busy, which are perhaps peculiar adaptations of meaning
of passives from the roots dṛ pierce and pṛ fill.
774. Examples of the transfer of stems from the yá- or passive class to the ya- or
intransitive class were given above (761 b); and it was also pointed out that active instead of
middle endings are occasionally, even in the earlier language, assumed by forms properly
passive: examples are ā́ dhmāyati and vy àpruṣyat (ÇB.), bhūyati (MāiU.). In the epics, however
(as a part of their general confusion of active and middle forms: 529 a), active endings are by
no means infrequently taken by the passive: thus, çakyati, çrūyanti, bhriyantu, ijyant- , etc.
The so-called Tenth or cur-Class.
775. As was noticed above (607), the Hindu grammarians — and, after their example, most
European also — recognize yet another conjugation-class, coördinate with those already
described; its stems show the class-sign áya, added to a generally strengthened root (for details
as to the strengthening, see 1042). Though this is no proper class, but a secondary or
derivative conjugation (its stems are partly of causative formation, partly denominative with
altered accent), an abbreviated example of its forms may, for the sake of accordance with other
grammars, be added here.
a. Example: root cint think, meditate; stem cintáya:
active.
middle.
Pres.
Indic.
cintáyāmi
cintáye
Subj.
cintáyāni
cintáyāi
Opt.
cintáyeyam
cintáyeya
Pple.
cintáyant
cintáyamāna
Impf.
ácintayam
ácintaye
b. The inflection, of course, is the same with that of other forms from a-stems (733 a).
c. The middle participle, in the later language, is more often made with āna instead of
māna: thus, cintayāna: see 1043 f.

Uses of the Present and Imperfect.
776. The uses of the mode-forms of the present-system have been already briefly treated in
the preceding chapter (572 ff.). The tense-uses of the two indicative tenses, present and
imperfect, call here for only a word or two of explanation.
777. The present has, besides its strictly present use, the same subsidiary uses which
belong in general to the tense: namely, the expression of habitual action, of future action, and
of past action in lively narration.
a. Examples of future meaning are: imáṁ céd vā́ imé cinváte táta evá no ‘bhíbhavanti  (ÇB.)
verily if these build this up, then they will straightway get the better of us ; agnir ātmabhavam
prādād yatra vāñchati nāiṣadhaḥ (MBh.) Agni gave his own presence wherever the Nishadhan
should desire; svāgataṁ te ‘stu kiṁ karomi tava  (R.) welcome to thee; what shall I do for thee?
b. Examples of past meaning are: úttarā sū́r ádharaḥ putrá āsīd dā́nuḥ çaye sahávatsā ná
dhenúḥ (RV.) the mother was over, the son under; there Dānu lies, like a cow with her calf ;
prahasanti ca tāṁ kecid abhyasūyanti cā ’pare akurvata dayāṁ kecit  (MBh.) some ridicule her,
some revile her, some pitied her; tato yasya vacanāt tatrā ’valambitās taṁ sarve tiraskurvanti
(H.) thereupon they all fall to reproaching him by whose advice they had alighted there.
778. In connection with certain particles, the present has rather more definitely the value of
a past tense. Thus:
a. With purā́ formerly: thus, saptarṣī́n u ha sma vāí purá rkṣā íty ā́cakṣate  (ÇB.) the seven
sages, namely, are of old called the bears; tanmātram api cen mahyaṁ na dadāti purā bhavān
(MBh.) if you have never before given me even an atom.
b. With the asseverative particle sma: thus, çrámeṇa ha sma vāí tád devā́ jayanti yád eṣāṁ
jáyyam ā́sá rṣayaç ca (ÇB.) in truth, both gods and sages were wont to win by penance what
was to be won; āviṣṭaḥ kalinā dyūte jīyate sma nalas tadā (MBh.) then Nala, being possessed by
Kali, was beaten in play.
c. No example of this last construction is found in either RV. or AV., or elsewhere in the
metrical parts of the Veda. In the Brāhmaṇas, only habitual action is expressed by it. At all
periods of the language, the use of sma with a verb as pure asseverative particle, with no
effect on the tense-meaning, is very common; and the examples later are hardly to be
distinguished from the present of lively narration — of which the whole construction is
doubtless a form.
779. The imperfect has remained unchanged in value through the whole history of the
language; it is the tense of narration; it expresses simple past time, without any other
implication.
a. Compare what is said later (end of chap. X. and chap. XI.) as to the value of the older
past tenses, the perfect and aorist.

CHAPTER X.
THE PERFECT-SYSTEM.
780. The perfect-system in the later language, as has been seen above (535), consists only
of an indicative tense and a participle — both of them in the two voices, active and middle.
a. In the oldest language, the perfect has also its modes and its augment-preterit, or
pluperfect, or is not less full in its apparatus of forms than is the present-system (see 808 ff.).
781. The formation of the perfect is essentially alike in all verbs, differences among them
being of only subordinate consequence, or having the character of irregularities. The
characteristics of the formation are these:
1. a stem made by reduplication of the root;
2. a distinction between stronger and weaker forms of stem, the former being used (as in
presents of the First or non-a-conjugation) in the singular active, the latter in all other persons;
3. endings in some respects peculiar, unlike those of the present;
4. the frequent use, especially in the later language, of a union-vowel इ i between stem and
endings.
782. Reduplication. In roots beginning with a consonant, the reduplication which forms the
perfect-stem is of the same character with that which forms the present-stem of the
reduplicating conjugation-class (see 643) — but with this exception, that radical अ a and आ ā
and ऋ ṛ (or अ ar) have only अ a, and never इ i, as vowel of the reduplicating syllable: thus,
from √पृ pṛ fill comes the present-stem िपपृ pipṛ, but the perfect-stem पपृ papṛ; from √मा mā

measure comes the present-stem िममा mimā, but the perfect-stem ममा mamā; and so on.
a. Irregularities of roots with initial consonants will be given below, 784.
783. For roots beginning with a vowel, the rules of reduplication are these:
a. A root with initial अ a before a single final consonant repeats the अ a, which then fuses
with the radical vowel to आ ā (throughout the whole inflection): thus, आ ād from √अ ad eat;
and in like manner आज् āj, आन् ān, आस् ās, आ āh. The root ऋ ṛ forms likewise throughout आ ār
(as if from अ ar).
b. A root with इ i or उ u before a single final consonant follows the same analogy, except in
the strong forms (sing. act.); here the vowel of the radical syllable has guṇa, becoming ए e or
ओ o; and before this, the reduplicating vowel maintains its independent form, and is separated
from the radical syllable by its own semivowel: thus, from √इष् iṣ comes ईष् īṣ in weak forms, but
इयेष् iyeṣ in strong; from √उच् uc, in like manner, come ऊच् ūc and उवोच् uvoc. The root इ i, a
single vowel, also falls under this rule, and forms ईय् īy (y added before a vowel) and इये iye.
c. Roots which begin with vowels long by nature or by position do not in general make a
perfect-system, but use instead a periphrastic formation, in which the perfect tense of an
auxiliary verb is added to the accusative of a verbal noun (see below, chap. XV.: 107O ff.).
d. To this rule, however, √āp (probably originally ap: 1087 f) constitutes an exception,
making the constant perfect-stem āp (as if from ap: above, a). Also are met with īḍé (RV.) and
īḍire from √īḍ, and īriré (V.) from √īr.
e. For the peculiar reduplication ān, belonging to certain roots with initial vowels, see
below, 788.
784. A number of roots beginning with va and ending with a single consonant, which in
various of their verbal forms and derivatives abbreviate the va to u, do it also in the perfect,
and are treated like roots with initial u (above, 783 b), except that they retain

the full form of root in the strong persons of the singular active. Thus, from √vac speak come
ūc and uvac; from √vas dwell come ūṣ and uvas; and so on.
a. The roots showing this abbreviation are vac, vap, vad, vaç, vas, vah; and vā weave is
said to follow the same rule.
b. A single root beginning with ya, namely yaj offer, has the same contraction, forming the
stems iyaj and ij.
c. Occasional exceptions are met with: as, vavāca and vavakṣé (RV.); vavāpa and vavāha
and vavāhatus (E. and later); yejé (V.).
785. A number of roots having ya after a first initial consonant take i (from the y) instead
of a in the reduplicating syllable: thus, from √vyac comes vivyac; from √pyā comes pipyā.
a. These roots are vyac, vyath, vyadh, vyā, jyā, pyā, syand; and, in the Veda, also tyaj, with
cyu and dyu, which have the root-vowel u. Other sporadic cases occur.
b. A single root with va is treated in the same way: namely svap, which forms suṣvap.
c. These roots are for the most part abbreviated in the weak forms: see below, 794.
786. A considerable number of roots have in the Veda a long vowel in their reduplication.
a. Thus, of roots reduplicating with ā: kan, kḷp, gṛdh, tṛp, tṛṣ, dṛh, dhṛ, dhṛṣ, nam, mah, mṛj,
mṛç, ran, radh, rabh, vañc, van, vaç, vas clothe, vāç, vṛj, vṛt, vṛdh, vṛṣ, çad prevail, sah,
skambh. Some of these occur only in isolated cases; many have also forms with short vowel.
Most are Vedic only; but dādhāra is common also in the Brāhmaṇa language, and is even found
later. As to jāgṛ, see 1020 a.
b. Of roots reduplicating with ī: the so-called roots (676) dīdhī and dīdī, which make the
perfect from the same stem with the present: thus, dīdétha, dīdā́ya; dīdhima, dīdhyus  (also
dīdhiyus, dīdiyus). But pīpī has pipye, pipyus, etc., with short i. In AV. occurs once jīhīḍa, and in
AB. (and AA.) bībhāya.
c. Of roots reduplicating with ū: tu, jū, and çū (or çvā).
787. A few roots beginning with the (derivative: 42) palatal mutes and aspiration show a
reversion to the more original guttural in the radical syllable after the reduplication: thus, √ci
forms ciki; √cit forms cikit; √ji forms jigi; √hi forms jighi; √han forms jaghan (and the same
reversions appear in other reduplicated forms of these roots: 2161). A root dā protect is said
by the grammarians to form digi; but neither root nor perfect is quotable.
788. A small number of roots with initial a or ṛ (ar) show the anomalous reduplication ān in
the perfect.
a. Thus (the forms occurring mainly in the older language only):

√añj or aj, which forms the pres. anákti, has the perfect ānañja and ānajé etc. (with anajā
and anajyāt);
√aç attain (from which comes once in RV. anáçāmahāi), has the weak forms ānaçma etc.
(with opt. ānaçām) , ānaçé etc. (and LÇS. has ānaçadhve), and the strong forms ānáṅça and
ānāça — along with the regular āça etc.;
√ṛdh (from which comes once ṛṇádhat) has ānṛdhús and ānṛdhe;
√ṛc or arc has ānṛcús and ānṛcé, and later ānarca and ānarcus;
√arh has (in TS.) ānṛhús;
anāha (RV., once) has been referred to a root ah, elsewhere unknown, and explained as of
this formation; hut with altogether doubtful propriety.
b. The later grammar, then, sets up the rule that roots beginning with a and ending with
more than one consonant have ān as their regular reduplication; and such perfects are taught
from roots like akṣ, arj, and añc or ac; but the only other quotable forms appear to be
ānarchat (MBh.) and ānarṣat (TA.); which are accordingly reckoned as "pluperfects".
789. One or two individual cases of irregularity are the following:
a. The extremely common root bhū be has the anomalous reduplication ba, forming the stem
babhū; and, in the Veda, √sū forms in like manner sasū.
b. The root bhṛ bear has in the Veda the anomalous reduplication ja (as also in intensive:
1002); but RV. has once also the regular babhre, and pple babhrāṇá.
c. The root ṣṭhīv spew forms either tiṣṭhīv (ÇB. et al.) or ṭiṣṭhīv (not quotable).
d. Vivakvā́n (RV., once) is doubtless participle of √vac, with irregular reduplication (as in the
present, 660).
790. Absence of reduplication is met with in some cases. Thus:
a. The root vid know has, from the earliest period to the latest, a perfect without
reduplication, but otherwise regularly made and inflected: thus, véda, véttha, etc., pple vidvā́ṅs.
It has the meaning of a present. The root vid find forms the regular vivéda.
b. A few other apparently perfect forms lacking a reduplication are found in RV.: they are
takṣathus and takṣus, yamátus, skambháthus and skambhus, nindima (for ninidima?), dhiṣe and
dhire (? √dhā), and vidré and arhire (? see 613). And AV. VS. have cetatus. The participial
words dāçvā́ṅs, mīḍhvā́ṅs, sāhvā́ṅs are common in the oldest language; and RV. has once
jānúṣas (√jñā), and khidvas (voc.), perhaps for cikhidvas.
c. A few sporadic cases also are quotable from the later language, especially from the epics:
thus, karṣatus, ceṣṭa and ceṣṭatus, bhrājatus, sarpa, çaṅsus and çaṅsire, dhvaṅsire, sraṅsire,
jalpire, edhire; also the pples çaṅsivāṅs and darçivāṅs, the latter being not infrequent.

791. For an anomalous case or two of reduplicated preposition, see below, 1087f.
792. Strong and weak stem-forms. In the three persons of the singular active, the root-
syllable is accented, and exhibits usually a stronger form than in the rest of the tense-inflection.
The difference is effected partly by strengthening the root in the three persons referred to,
partly by weakening it in the others, partly by doing both.
793. As regards the strengthening:
a. A final vowel takes either the guṇa or vṛddhi change in 1st sing. act., guṇa in 2d, and
vṛddhi in 3d: thus, from √भी bhī, 1st िबभे bibhé or िबभै bibhāí; 2d िबभे bibhé; 3d िबभै bibhāí; from
√ kṛ, 1st चक cakár or चका cakā́r, 2d चक cakár, 3d चका cakā́r.
b. But the ū of √bhū remains unchanged, and adds v before a vowel-ending: thus, babhū́va
etc.
c. Medial अ a before a single final consonant follows the analogy of a final vowel, and is
lengthened or vriddhied in the 3d. sing., and optionally in the first: thus, from √तप् tap, 1st ततप्
tatáp or तताप् tatā́p, 2d ततप् tatáp, 3d तताप् tatā́p.
d. In the earlier language, however, the weaker of the two forms allowed by these rules in
the first person is almost exclusively in use: thus, 1st only bibháya, tatápa; 3d bibhā́ya, tatā́pa.
Exceptions are cakāra and jagrā́ha (doubtful reading) in AV., cakāra in AÇS. and BAU. (ÇB.
cakara), jigāya in AÇS., as first persons.
e. A medial short vowel has in all three persons alike the guṇa-strengthening (where this is
possible: 240): thus, from √ druh comes ो dudróh; from √िव viç comes िववे vivéç; from
√त् kṛt comes चकत् cakárt.
f. An initial short vowel before a single final consonant is to be treated like a medial, but
the quotable examples are very few: namely, iyeṣa from √iṣ seek, uvocitha and uvoca from √uc,
uvoṣa from √uṣ. As to roots i and ṛ, whose vowels are both initial and final, see above, 783 a,
b.
g. These rules are said by the grammarians to apply to the 2d sing. always when it has
simple tha as ending; if it has itha (below, 797 d),

the accent is allowed to fall on any one of the syllables of the word, and the root-syllable if
unaccented has sometimes the weak form (namely, in contracted stems with e for medial a:
below, 794 e; and in certain other verbs, as vivijitha). The earlier language, however, affords no
example of a 2d sing., whatever its ending, accented on any other than the radical syllable, or
failing to conform to the rules of strengthening as given above (in a, c, e).
h. Occasional instances of strengthening in other than the singular persons are met with:
thus, yuyopima and viveçus (RV.), pasparçus (KeU.), and, in the epics, cakartus and cakartire,
cakarṣatus, jugūhire, nanāmire, bibhedus, vavāhatus, viveçatus, vavarṣus. The roots dṛ, pṛ, and
çṛ, and optionally jṛ, are said by the grammarians to have the strong stem in weak forms; but
no examples appear to be quotable. AV., however, has once jaharus (probably a false reading);
and in the later language occur caskare (√kṛ scatter) and tastare.
i. The root mṛj has (as in the present-system: 627) vṛddhi instead of guṇa in strong forms:
thus, mamā́rja; and √guh (also as in present: 745 c) has ū instead of o (but also juguhe E.).
794. As regards the weakening in weak forms:
a. It has been seen above (783 b) that roots beginning with i or u fuse reduplicating and
radical syllable together to ī or ū in the weak forms; and (784) that roots contracting va and ya
to u or i in the reduplication do it also in the root in weak forms, the two elements here also
coalescing to ū or ī.
b. A few roots having ya and va after a first initial consonant, and reduplicating from the
semivowel (785), contract the ya and va to i and u: thus, vivic from √vyac, vividh from √vyadh
(but vivyadhus MBh.), suṣup from √svap. The extended roots jyā, pyā, vyā, çvā, hvā show a
similar apparent contraction, making their weak forms from the simpler roots jī, pī, vī, çū, hū,
while hvā must and çvā may get their strong forms also from the same (and only jijyāú is
quotable from the others).
c. The root grabh or grah (if it be written thus: see 729 a) contracts to gṛh, making the
three forms of stem jagráh (1st and 2d sing. act.), jagrā́h (3d), and jagṛh; but prach (if it be so
written: see 756 a) remains unchanged throughout.
d. Some roots omit in weak forms of this tense, or in some of them, a nasal which is found
in its strong forms: thus, we have cakradé etc. (RV.) from √krand; tatasré (RV.) from √taṅs;
dadaçvā́ṅs (RV.) from √daṅç; bedhús, bedhé, etc. (AV.) from √bandh; sejus (ÇB.) from √sañj;
caskabhāná (AV.) from √skambh; tastabhús etc. (V.), tastabhāná (V.B.), from √stambh. Compare
also 788 a.
e. A number of roots having medial a between single consonants drop that vowel. These
are, in the later language, gam, khan, jan,

han, ghas; they form the weak stems jagm, cakhn, jajñ, jaghn (compare 637), jakṣ (compare
640): but RV. has once jajanús.
f. In the old language are found in like manner mamnāthe and mamnāte from √man; vavné
from √van; tatne, tatniṣe, tatnire from √tan (beside tatane, and tate, as if from √tā) ; paptima
and paptús and paptivā́ṅs from √pat (beside pet-forms; below, g); papné from √pan; saçcima
and saçcus, saçce and saçciré, from √sac.
g. Roots in general having medial a before a single final consonant, and beginning also with
a single consonant that is repeated unchanged in the reduplication — that is, not an aspirate, a
guttural mute, or h — contract their root and reduplication together into one syllable, having e
as its vowel: thus, √sad forms the weak stem sed, √pac forms pec, √yam forms yem; and so on.
h. Certain roots not having the form here defined are declared by the grammarians to
undergo the same contraction — most of them optionally; and examples of them are in general
of very rare occurrence. They are as follows: rāj (E.C.) and rādh (radh?), notwithstanding their
long vowel; phaṇ, phal (phelire C.), bhaj (occurs from RV. down), though their initial is changed
in reduplication; trap, tras (tresus E.C.), çrath, syarn, svan, though they begin with more than
one consonant; dambh (debhús, RV., from the weaker dabh), though it ends with more than
one; and bhram (bhremus etc. KSS.), bhrāj, granth, svañj, in spite of more reasons than one to
the contrary. And ÇB. has sejus from √sañj, and KB. has çremus from √çram. On the other
hand, RV. has once rarabhmá, and R. has papatus, for petus, from √pat.
i. This contraction is allowed also in 2d sing. act. when the ending is itha: thus, tenitha
beside tatantha (but no examples are quotable from the older language).
j. The roots çaç and dad (from dā: 672) are said to reject the contraction; but no perfect
forms of either appear to have been met with in use.
k. From √tṛ (or tar) occurs terus (R.); and jerus from √jṛ is authorized by the grammarians
— both against the general analogy of roots in ṛ.
l. Roots ending in ā lose their ā before all endings beginning with a vowel, including those
endings that assume the union-vowel i (796) — unless in the latter case it be preferred to
regard the i as a weakened form of the ā.
795. Endings, and their union with the stem. The general scheme of endings of the perfect
indicative has been already given (553 c); an dit has also been pointed out (543 a) that roots
ending in आ ā have औ āu in 1st and 3d sing. active.

a. The ending mas instead of ma is found in çuçrumas (E.C.). For the alleged occurrence of
ḍhve instead of dhve in 2d pl. mid., see 226 c.
796. Those of the endings which begin with a consonant — namely थ tha, व va, म ma in
active; से se, वहे vahe, महे mahe, े dhve, रे re in middle — are very often, and in the later
language usually, joined to the base with the help of an interposed union-vowel इ i.
a. The union-vowel i is found widely used also in other parts of the general verbal system:
namely, in the sibilant aorist, the futures, and the verbal nouns and adjectives (as also in other
classes of derivative stems). In the later language, a certain degree of correspondence is seen
among the different parts of the same verb, as regards their use or non-use of the connective;
but this correspondence is not so close that general rules respecting it can be given with
advantage; and it will be best to treat each formation by itself.
b. The perfect is the tense in which the use of i has established itself most widely and
firmly in the later language.
797. The most important rules as to the use of इ i in the later language are as follows:
a. The रे re of 3d pl. mid. has it always.
b. The other consonant-endings, except थ tha of 2d sing. act., take it in nearly all verbs.
c. But it is rejected throughout by eight verbs — namely kṛ make, bhṛ bear, sṛ go, vṛ
choose, dru run, çru hear, stu praise, sru flow; and it is allowably (not usually) rejected by
some others, in general accordance with their usage in other formations.
d. In 2d sing. act., it is rejected not only by the eight verbs just given, but also by many
others, ending in vowels or in consonants, which in other formations have no इ i; but it is also
taken by many verbs which reject it in other formations; — and it is optional in many verbs,
including those in आ ā (of which the आ ā is lost when the ending is इथ itha), and most of those
in इ i, ई ī, and उ u.
e. The rules of the grammarians, especially as regards the use of tha or itha, run out into
infinite detail, and are not wholly consistent with one another; and, as the forms are very
infrequent, it is not possible to criticise the statements made, and to tell how far they are
founded on the facts of usage.

f. With this i, a final radical i or ī is not combined, but changed into y or iy. The ū of √bhū
becomes ūv throughout before a vowel.
798. In the older language, the usage is in part quite otherwise. Thus.
a. In the RV., the union-vowel i is taken by roots ending in consonants provided the last
syllable of the stem is a heavy one, but not otherwise: thus, ā́sitha, uvócitha, vivéditha, but
tatántha and vivyáktha; ūcimá, paptima, sedima, yuyopimá, but jaganma, jagṛbhmá, yuyujma;
ūçiṣé, jajñiṣé, sasāhiṣe, but vivitse and dadṛkṣé; bubhujmáhe and çāçadmahe etc. (no examples
o f ivahe or imahe chance to occur, nor any of either idhve or dhve) ; ījiré, jajñiré, yetiré,
tataksiré, but cākḷpré, vividré, duduhré, paspṛdhré, tatasré  (and so on: twenty-two forms). The
only exception in RV. is véttha from √vid, without i (in Br., also āttha from √ah: below, 801 a).
The other Vedic texts present nothing inconsistent with this rule, but in the Brāhmaṇas 3d pl.
forms in ire are made after light syllables also: thus, sasṛjire, bubudhire, yuyujire, rurudhire.
b. In roots ending with a vowel, the early usage is more nearly like the later. Thus: for
roots in ā the rule is the same (except that no 2d sing. in itha is met with), as dadhimá,
dadhiṣé, dadhidhvé, dadhiré (the only persons with i quotable from RV. and AV.; and RV. has
dadhre twice); — roots in ṛ appear also to follow the later rule: as cakṛṣé, papṛṣe, vavṛṣé,
vavṛmáhe, but dadhriṣe and jabhriṣe, and in 3d pl. mid. both cakriré and dadhrire; — √bhū has
both babhū́tha (usually) and babhū́vitha, but only babhūvimá (AV.). But there are found, against
the later rules, suṣuma, cicyuṣe, juhuré, and juhūré, without i: the instances are too few to
found a rule upon.
799. The ending riré of 3d pl. mid. is found in RV. in six forms: namely, cikitrire, jagṛbhriré,
dadrire, bubhujriré, vividrire, sasṛjrire; to which SV. adds duduhrire, and TB. dadṛçrire.
800. Examples of inflection. By way of illustration of the rules given above may be given in
full the perfect indicative inflection of the following verbs:
a. As example of the normal inflection of a root with final consonant, we take the root बुध्
budh know: its strong form of perfect-stem is बुबोध् bubódh; weak form, बुबुध् bubudh.
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
बुबोध
bubódha
बुबुिधव
bubudhivá
बुबुिधम
-dhimá
बुबुधे
bubudhé
बुबुिधवहे
-dhiváhe
बुबुिधमहे
-dhimáhe

2
बुबोिधथ
bubódhitha
बुबुधथुस्
-dháthus
बुबुध
-dhá
बुबुिधषे
bubudhiṣé
बुबुधाथे
-dhā́the
बुबुिधे
-dhidhvé
3
बुबोध
bubódha
बुबुधतुस्
-dhátus
बुबुधुस्
-dhús
बुबुधे
bubudhé
बुबुधाते
-dhā́te
बुबुिधरे
-dhiré
b. The asserted variety of possible accent in 2d sing. act. (above, 793 g) needs to be noted
both in this and in the remaining paradigms.
c. As example of the normal inflection of a root with final i or u-vowel, we may take the
root नी nī lead: its forms of stem are िननय् nináy or िननाय् ninā́y, and िननी ninī.
1
िननय, िननाय
nináya, ninā́ya
िनिव
ninyivá
िनिम
ninyimá
िने
ninyé
िनिवहे
ninyiváhe
िनिमहे
ninyimáhe
2
िननेथ, िननियथ
ninétha, nináyitha
िनथुस्
ninyáthus
िन
ninyá
िनिषे
ninyiṣé
िनाथे
ninyā́the
िनिे
ninyidhvé
3
िननाय
ninā́ya
िनतुस्
ninyátus
िनुस्
ninyús
िने
ninyé
िनाते
ninyā́te
िनिरे
ninyiré
d. The root krī would make (129 a) in weak forms cikriyivá, cikriyátus, cikriyús, etc.; and
√bhū is inflected as follows in the active (middle forms not quotable):
1
babhū́va
babhūvivá
babhūvimá
2
babhū́tha, babhū́vitha
babhūváthus
babhūvá
3
babhū́va
babhūvátus
babhūvús
Other roots in ū or u change this to uv before the initial vowel of an ending.
e. As example of the inflection of a root ending in आ ā, we may take दा dā give: its forms of
stem are ददा dadā́ and द dad (or दिद dadi: see above, 7941).
1
ददौ
dadāú
दिदव
dadivá
दिदम
dadimá
ददे
dadé
दिदवहे
vdadiváhe
दिदमहे
dadimáhe
2
ददाथ, दिदथ
dadā́tha, dadithá
ददथुस्
dadáthus
दद
dadá
दिदषे
dadiṣé
ददाथे
dadā́the
दिदे
dadidhvé
3
ददौ
dadāú
ददतुस्
dadátus
दस्
dadús
ददे
dadé
ददाते
dadā́te
दिदरे
dadiré
f. The RV. has once paprā́ for paprāú (and jahā́ for jahāú?).

g. As example of a root with medial अ a showing fusion of root and reduplication, resulting
in medial ए e, in the weak forms (794 g), we may take तन्, tan stretch: its forms of stem are ततन्
tatán or ततान् tatā́n, and तेन् ten.
1
ततन, ततान
tatána, tatā́na
तेिनव
tenivá
तेिनम
tenimá
तेने
tené
तेिनवहे
teniváhe
तेिनमहे
tenimáhe
2
तत, तेिनथ
tatántha, tenithá
तेनथुस्
tenáthus
तेन
tená
तेिनषे
teniṣé
तेनाथे
tenā́the
तेिने
tenidhvé
3
ततान
tatā́na
तेनतुस्
tenátus
तेनुस्
tenús
तेने
tené
तेनाते
tenā́te
तेिनरे
teniré
h. The root jan, with the others which expel medial a in weak forms (794 e), makes jajántha
or jajñithá, jajñivá, jajñús; jajñé, jajñimáhe, jajñiré ; and so on.
i. As example of a root with initial व va contracted to उ u in the reduplication, and
contracted with the reduplication to ऊ ū in weak forms (784), we may take वच् vac speak: its
forms of stem are उवच् uvác or उवाच् uvā́c, and ऊच् ūc.
1
उवच, उवाच
uváca, uvā́ca
ऊिचव
ūcivá
ऊिचम
ūcimá
ऊचे
ūcé
ऊिचवहे
ūciváhe
ऊिचमहे
ūcimáhe
2
उवथ, उविचथे
uváktha, uvácitha
ऊचथुस्
ūcáthus
ऊच
ūcá
ऊिचषे
ūciṣé
ऊचाथे
ūcā́the
ऊिचे
ūcidhvé
3
उवाच
uvā́ca
ऊचतुस्
ūcátus
ऊचुस्
ūcús
ऊचे
ūcé
ऊचाते
ūcáte
ऊिचरे
ūciré
j. In like manner, √yaj forms iyája or iyā́ja, iyáṣṭha or iyájitha; ījé, ījiṣé, and so on; √uc has
uvóca and uvócitha in the strong forms, and all the rest like vac.
k. Of the four roots in ऋ ṛ mentioned at 797 c, the inflection is as follows:
1
चकर, चकार
cakára, cakā́ra
चव
cakṛvá
चम
cakṛmá
चे
cakré
चवहे
cakṛváhe
चमहे
cakṛmáhe
2
चकथ
cakártha
चथुस्
cakráthus
च
cakrá
चषे
cakṛṣé
चाथे
cakrā́the
चे
cakṛdhvé
3
चकार
cakā́ra
चतुस्
cakrátus
चस्
cakrús
चे
cakré
चाते
cakrā́te
चिरे
cakriré

l. Of the roots in ऋ ṛ in general, the first persons are made as follows:
1
दधर, दधार
dadhára, dadhā́ra
दिथव
dadhrivá
दिथम
dadhrimá
दथे
dadhré
दिथवहे
dadhriváhe
दिथमहे
dadhrimáhe
m. We may further add here, finally, the active inflection (the middle is not in use) of the
perfect of as be, which (like babhū́va and cakā́ra, given above) is frequently employed as an
auxiliary.
1
ā́sa
āsivá
āsimá
2
ā́sitha
āsáthus
āsá
3
ā́sa
āsátus
āsús
801. A few miscellaneous irregularities call still for notice:
a. The root ah speak occurs only in the perfect indicative, and only in the 3d persons of all
numbers and in the 2d sing. and du., in active (and in 2d sing. the h is irregularly changed to t
before the ending): thus, āttha, ā́ha; āhathus, āhatus; āhús  (in V., only ā́ha and āhús are met
with).
b. From √vā weave, the 3d pl. act. ūvus occurs in RV., and no other perfect form appears to
have been met with in use. It is allowed by the grammarians to be inflected regularly as vā;
and also as vay (the present-stem is váya: 761 f), with contraction of va to u in weak forms;
and further, in the weak forms, as simple u.
c. The root vyā envelop has in RV. the perfect-forms vivyathus and vivyé, and no others
have been met with in use; the grammarians require the strong forms to be made from vyay,
and the weak from vī.
d. The root i go forms in RV. and AV. the 2d sing. act. iyátha beside the regular iyétha; and
beside īriré from √īr, RV. has several times eriré.
e. RV. has an anomalous accent in dádṛçe and dádṛçre (beside dadṛkṣé) and the pple
dádṛçāna. And cíketa (once, beside cikéta) is perhaps a kindred anomaly.
f. Persons of the perfect from the ir-forms of roots in changeable ṛ (242) are titirus and
tistire (both RV.); and they have corresponding participles.
g. The bastard root ūrṇu (713) is said by the grammarians to make the perfect-stem ūrṇunu;
the roots majj and naç are said to insert a nasal in the 2d sing. active, when the ending is
simple tha: thus, maman̄ktha, nanaṅṣṭha (also mamajjitha and neçitha).
h. Further may be noted sasajjatus (MBh.: √sañj, which has in passive the secondary form
sajj), rurundhatus (R.), and dudūhus (BhP).
i. The anomalous ajagrabhāiṣam (AH. vi. 35) seems a formation on the perfect-stem (but
perhaps for ajigrabhiṣan, desid.?).

Perfect Participle.
802. The ending of the active participle is वांस् √vā́ṅs (that is to say, in the strong forms: it
is contracted to उष् úṣ in the weakest, and replaced by वत् vát in the middle forms: see above,
458 ff.). It is added to the weak form of the perfect stem — as shown, for example, in the dual
and plural of the active inflection of the given verb; and, mechanically, the weakest participle-
stem is identical with the 3d pl. active. Thus, बुबुांस् bubudhvā́ṅs, िननीवांस् ninīvā́ṅs, चवांस्
cakṛvā́ṅs.
803. If the weak form of the perfect stem is monosyllabic, the ending takes the union-vowel
इ i (which, however, disappears in the weakest cases): thus, तेिनवांस् tenivā́ṅs, ऊिदवांस् ūcivā́ṅs,
जिवांस् jajñivā́ṅs, आिदवांस् ādivā́ṅs (from √आ ād: 783 a), and so on; दिदवांस् dadivā́ṅs and its like,
from roots in आ ā, are to be reckoned in the one class or the other according as we view the इ
i as weakened root-vowel or as union-vowel (7941).
a. But participles of which the perfect-stem is monosyllabic by absence of the reduplication
do not take the union-vowel: thus, vidvā́ṅs, and in V., dāçvā́ṅs (SV. dāçivā́ṅs) , mīḍhvā́ṅs,
sāhvā́ṅs, khidvāṅs (?); and RV. has also dadvā́ṅs (AV. dadivā́ṅs and once dadāvā́ṅs) from √dā (or
dad: 672); and án-āçvāṅs (√aç eat) occurs in TS. and TB. But AV. has viçivā́ṅs and varjivāṅs (in
negative fem. ávarjuṣī).
804. Other Vedic irregularities calling for notice are few. The long vowel of the
reduplication (786) appears in the participle as in the indicative: thus, vāvṛdhvā́ṅs, sāsahvā́ṅs,
jūjuvā́ṅs. RV. and AV. have sasavā́ṅs from √san or sā. RV. makes the participial forms of √tṛ or
tar from different modifications of the root: thus, titirvā́ṅs, but tatarúṣas. Respecting the
occasional exchanges of strong and weak stem in inflection, see above, 462 c.
805. a. From roots gam and ban the Veda makes the strong stems jaganvā́ṅs (as to the n,
see 212 a) and jaghanvā́ṅs; the later language allows either these or the more regular
jagmivāṅs and jaghnivā́ṅs (the weakest stem-forms being everywhere jagmúṣ and jaghnúṣ). RV.
has also tatanvā́ṅa.

b. From three roots, vid find, viç, and dṛç, the later language allows strong participle-stems
to be made with the union-vowel, as well as in the regular manner without it: thus, viviçivāṅs
or viviçvāṅs; dadṛçivāṅs occurs in KṭhU. PB. has once cicchidivāṅs.
806. The ending of the middle participle is āná. It is added to the weak form of perfect-
stem, as this appears in the middle inflection: thus, बुबुधान bubudhāná, िनान ninyāná, ददान
dadāná, तेनान tenāná, जान jajñāná, उचान ūcāná.
a. In the Veda, the long reduplicating vowel is shown by many middle participles: thus,
vāvṛdhāná, vāvasāná, dādṛhāṇá, tūtujāná, etc. RV. has çaçayāná from √çī (with irregular guṇa,
as in the present-system: 629); tistirāṇá from √stṛ; and once, with māna, sasṛmāṇá from √sṛ. A
few participles with long redupl. vowel have it irregularly accented (as if rather intensive:
1013): thus, tū́tujāna (also tūtujāná), bā́badhāna, çā́çadāna, çū́çujāna, çū́çuvāna.
807. In the later language, the perfect participles have nearly gone out of use; even the
active appears but rarely, and is made from very few verbs, and of the middle hardly any
examples are quotable, save such as the proper name yuyudhāna, the adjective anūcāna learned
in scripture, etc.
Modes of the Perfect.
808. Modes of the perfect belong only to the Vedic language, and even are seldom found
outside of the Rig-Veda.
a. To draw the line surely and distinctly between these and the mode-forms from other
reduplicated tense-stems — the present-stem of the reduplicating class, the reduplicated aorist,
and the intensive — is not possible, since no criterion of form exists which does not in some
cases fail, and since the general equivalence of modal forms from all stems (582), and the
common use of the perfect as a present in the Veda (823), deprive us of a criterion of meaning.
There can be no reasonable doubt, however, that a considerable body of forms are to be
reckoned here; optatives like ānaçyām and babhūyās and babhūyā́t, imperatives like babhūtu,
subjunctives like jabhárat, show such distinctive characteristics of the perfect formation that by
their analogy other similar words are confidently classed as belonging to the perfect.
809. The normal method of making such forms would appear to be as follows: from a
reduplicated perfect-stem, as (for example) mumuc, an imperative would be made by simply
appending, as usual, the imperative endings; the derived subjunctive mode-stem would be
mumóca (accented after the analogy of the strong forms

of the perfect indicative), and would take either primary or secondary endings; and the optative
mode-stems would be mumucyā́ in the active, and mumucī (accent on personal endings) in the
middle.
And the great majority of the forms in question (about three quarters) are made in these
ways. Thus:
810. Examples of the regular subjunctive formation are:
a. with secondary endings, active: 2d sing., papráthas, cākánas, māmáhas, pipráyas,
bubodhas, rāráṇas; 3d sing., cākánat, jabhárat, rāráṇat, sāsáhat, paspárçat, pipráyat ; 1st pl.,
cākánāma, tatánāma, çūçávāma; 3d pl., tatánan, papráthan (other persons do not occur). This is
the largest class of cases.
b. with primary endings, active: here seem to belong only dadhárṣati and vavártati: compare
the formation with different accent below, 811 a.
c. of middle forms occur only the 3d sing., tatápate, çaçámate, yuyójate, jujóṣate (SV.; RV.
has jújoṣate); and the 3d pl. cākánanta, tatánanta (and perhaps two or three others: below, 811
b, end).
811. But not a few subjunctives of other formation occur; thus:
a. With strengthened root-syllable, as above, but with accent on the reduplication (as in the
majority of present-forms of the reduplicating class: above, 645). Here the forms with primary
endings, active, preponderate, and are not very rare: for example, jújoṣasi, jújoṣati, jújoṣathas,
jújoṣatha (other persons do not occur). With secondary endings, jújoṣas, jújoṣat, and jújoṣan are
the forms that belong most distinctly here (since dádāças and súṣūdas etc. are perhaps rather
aorists). And there is no middle form but jújoṣate (RV.: see above, 810 c).
b. With unstrengthened root-syllable occur a small body of forms, which are apparently also
accented on the reduplication (accented examples are found only in 3d pl. mid.): thus, active,
for example, mumucas; vavṛtat, vividat, çūçuvat; the only middle forms are dadhṛṣate, vāvṛdhate,
3d sing.; and cákramanta, dádhṛṣanta, rúrucanta (with dadabhanta, paprathanta, māmahanta,
juhuranta, which might also belong elsewhere: 810 c).
c. Accented on the ending are vāvṛdhánta and cakṛpánta (which are rather to be called
augmentless pluperfects).
d. As to forms with double mode-sign, or transfers to an a-conjugation, see below, 815.
812. Examples of the regular optative formation are:
a. In active: 1st sing., ānaçyām, jagamyām, papṛcyām, riricyām; 2d sing., vavṛtyās, viviçyās,
çuçrūyā́s, babhūyās; 3d sing., jagamyāt, vavṛtyāt, tutujyā́t, babhūyā́t; 2d du., jagmyātam,
çuçrūyā́tam; 1st pl., sāsahyāma, vavṛtyāma, çūçuyāma; 3d pl., tatanyus, vavṛjyús, vavṛtyus. The
forms are quite numerous.

b. In middle, the forms are few: namely, 1st sing., vavṛtīya; 2d sing., vāvṛdhīthā́s,
cakṣamīthās; 3d sing., jagrasīta, vavṛtīta, māmṛjīta, dudhuvīta, çuçucīta ; 1st pl., vavṛtīmahi. And
sāsahīṣṭhās and ririṣīṣṭa appear to furnish examples of precative optative forms.
c. There is no irregular mode of formation of perfect optatives. Individual irregularities are
shown by certain forms: thus, cakriyās, papīyāt, çuçrūyā́s and çuçrūyā́tam , with treatment of the
final as before the passive-sign yá (770); anajyāt with short initial; çiçrītá from √çri; jakṣīyāt is
anomalous: ririṣes is the only form that shows a union-vowel a (unless also siṣet, from √sā).
813. Of regular imperative forms, only a very small number are to be quoted: namely,
active, cākandhi, rārandhí, cikiddhi, titigdhi, mumugdhí, çuçugdhí , and piprīhí; cākantu, rārantu,
mumoktu, and babhūtu; mumuktam and vavṛktam; jujuṣṭana and vavṛttana (unless we are to
a d d mamaddhí, mamattu, mamáttana); — middle, vavṛtsva and vavṛddhvam. AV. has once
dadṛçrām.
814. As irregular imperatives may be reckoned several which show a union-vowel a, or have
been transferred to an a-conjugation. Such are, in the active, mumócatam and jujoṣatam (2d
du.), and mumócata (2d pl.); in the middle, pipráyasva (only one found with accent), and
māmahasva, vāvṛdhasva, vāvṛṣasva (2d sing.), and māmahantām (3d pl.: probably to be accented
-ásva and -ántām).
815. Such imperatives as these, taken in connection with some of the subjunctives given
above (and a few of the "pluperfect" forms: below, 820), suggest as plausible the assumption of
a double present-stem, with reduplication and added a (with which the desiderative stems
would be comparable: below, 1026 ff.): for example, jujoṣa from √juṣ, from which would come
jújoṣasi etc. and jújoṣate (811 a) as indicative, jújoṣas etc. as subjunctively used augmentless
imperfect, and jujoṣatam as imperative. Most of the forms given above as subjunctives with
primary ending lack a marked and constant subjunctive character, and would pass fairly well as
indicatives. And it appears tolerably certain that from one root at least, vṛdh, such a double
stem is to be recognized; from vāvṛdha come readily vāvṛdhate, vāvṛdhánta, and from it alone
can come regularly vāvṛdhasva, vāvṛdhéte and vāvṛdhāti (once, RV.) — and, yet more, the
participle vavṛdhánt (RV.; AV. vāvṛdhánt: an isolated case): yet even here we have also
vāvṛdhīthā́s, not vāvṛdhéthās. To assume double present-stems, however, in all the cases would
be highly implausible; it is better to recognize the formation as one begun, but not carried out.
a. Only one other subjunctive with double mode-sign — namely, papṛcāsi — is found to set
beside vāvṛdhāti.
816. Forms of different model are not very seldom made from the same root: for example,
from √muc, the subjunctives mumócas, múmo-

cati, and mumucas; from √dhṛṣ, dadhárṣati and dadhṛṣate; from √prī, the imperatives piprīhí and
pipráyasva.
Pluperfect.
817. Of an augment-preterit from the perfect-stem, to which the name of pluperfect is given
on the ground of its formation (though not of its meaning), the Veda presents a few examples;
and one or two forms of the later language (mentioned above, 788 b) have also been referred
to it.
a. There is much of the same difficulty in distinguishing the pluperfect as the perfect modes
from kindred reduplicated formations. Between it and the aorist, however, a difference of
meaning helps to make a separation.
818. The normal pluperfect should show a strong stem in the singular active, and a weak
one elsewhere — thus, mumoc and mumuc — with augment prefixed and secondary endings
added (us in 3d pl. act., ata in 3d pl. mid.).
a. Of forms made according to this model, we have, in the active: 1st sing., ajagrabham and
acacakṣam (which, by its form, might be aorist: 860); 2d sing. ájagan; 3d sing., ajagan and
aciket; 2d du., amumuktam; 2d pl. ájaganta, and ájagantana and ajabhartana (a strong form, as
often in this person: 556 a); 3d pl. (perhaps), amamandus and amamadus. To these may be
added the augmentless cākán and rārán, cikétam and cakaram. In the middle, the 3d pl.
acakriran and ajagmiran (with iran instead of ata), and the augmentless 2d sing. jugūrthās and
suṣupthās, are the most regular forms to be found.
819. Several forms from roots ending in consonants save the endings in 2d and 3d sing. act.
by inserting an ī (555 b): thus, ábubhojīs, aviveçīs; arirecīt, ájagrabhīt (avāvarīt and avāvaçītām
are rather intensives); and the augmentless jíhiṅsīs (accent?) and dadharṣīt belong with them.
820. A few forms show a stem ending in a: they are, in the active: 3d sing., asasvajat,
acikitat, acakrat; in the middle: 3d sing., ápiprata; 2d du., ápaspṛdhethām; 3d pl., atitviṣanta
(which by its form might be aorist), ádadṛhanta; and cakradat, cakṛpánta, vāvṛdhánta, juhuranta,
would perhaps be best classified here as augmentless forms (compare 811, above).
Uses of the Perfect.
821. Perfects are quotable as made from more than half the roots of the language, and they
abound in use at every period and in almost all branches of the literature, though not always
with the same value.
a. According to the Hindu grammarians, the perfect is used in the

narration of facts not witnessed by the narrator; but there is no evidence of its being either
exclusively or distinctively so employed at any period.
b. In the later language, it is simply a preterit or past tense, equivalent with the imperfect,
and freely interchangeable or coördinated with it. It is on the whole less common than the
imperfect, although the preferences of different authors are diverse, and it sometimes exceeds
the imperfect in frequency (compare (927).
c. The perfects veda and āha are everywhere used with present value. In the Brāhmaṇas,
also others, especially dādhāra, also dīdāya, bibhāya, etc.
822. In the Brāhmaṇas, the distinction of tense-value between perfect and imperfect is
almost altogether lost, as in the later language. But in most of the texts the imperfect is the
ordinary tense of narration, the perfect being only exceptionally used. Thus in PB., the
imperfects are to the perfects as more than a hundred to one; in the Brāhmaṇa parts of TS.
and TB., as over thirty-four to one; and in those of MS. in about the same proportion; in AB., as
more than four to one, the perfect appearing mostly in certain passages, where it takes the
place of imperfect. It is only in ÇB. that the perfect is much more commonly used, and even,
to a considerable extent, in coördination with the imperfect. Throughout the Brāhmaṇas,
however, the perfect participles have in general the true "perfect" value, indicating a completed
or proximate past.
823. In the Veda, the case is very different. The perfect is used as past tense in narration,
but only rarely; sometimes also it has a true "perfect" sense, or signifies a completed or
proximate past (like the aorist of the older language: 928); but oftenest it has a value hardly or
not at all distinguishable in point of time from the present. It is thus the equivalent of
imperfect, aorist, and present; and it occurs coördinated with them all.
a. Examples are: of perfect with present, ná çrāmyanti ná ví muñcanty éte váyo ná paptuḥ
(RV.) they weary not nor stop, they fly like birds ; sé ’d u rā́ja kṣayati carṣaṇīnā́m arā́n ná nemíḥ
pári tā́ babhūva (RV.) he in truth rules king of men; he embraces them all, as the wheel the
spokes; — of perfect with aorist, úpo ruruce yuvatír ná yóṣā...ábhūd agníḥ samídhe mā́nuṣāṇām
ákar jyótir bā́dhamānā támāṅsi (RV.) she is come beaming like a young maiden; Agni hath
appeared for the kindling of mortals; she hath made light, driving away the darkness; — of
perfect with imperfect, áhann áhim ánv apás tatarda (RV.) he slew the dragon, he penetrated
to the waters. Such a coordination as this last is of constant occurrence in the later language:
e. g. mumude ‘pūjayac cāi ’nām (R.) he was glad, and paid honor to her; vastrānte jagrāha
skandhadeçe ‘sṛjat tasya srajam (MBh.) she took hold of the end of his garment, and dropped a
garland on his shoulders.

CHAPTER XI.
THE AORIST SYSTEMS.
824. Under the name of aorist are included (as was pointed out above, 532) three quite
distinct formations, each of which has its sub-varieties: namely —
I. A simple aorist (equivalent to the Greek "second aorist"), analogous in all respects as to
form and inflection with the imperfect. It has two varieties: 1. the root-aorist, with a tense-stem
identical with the root (corresponding to an imperfect of the root-class); 2. the a-aorist, with a
tense-stem ending in अ á, or with union-vowel अ a before the endings (corresponding to an
imperfect of the á-class).
II. 3. A reduplicating aorist, perhaps in origin identical with an imperfect of the
reduplicating class, but having come to be separated from it by marked peculiarities of form. It
usually has a union-vowel अ a before the endings, or is inflected like an imperfect of one of the
a-classes; but a few forms occur in the Veda without such vowel.
III. A sigmatic or sibilant aorist (corresponding to the Greek "first aorist"), having for its
tense-sign a स् s added to the root, either directly or with a preceding auxiliary इ i; its endings
are usually added immediately to the tense-sign, but in a small number of roots with a union-
vowel अ a; a very few roots also are increased by स् s for its formation; and according to these
differences it falls into four varieties: namely, A. without union-vowel अ a before endings; 4. s-
aorist, with स् s alone added to the root; 5. iṣ-aorist, the same with interposed इ i; 6. siṣ-aorist,
the same as the preceding with स् s added at the end of the root; B. with union-vowel अ a, 7.
sa-aorist.

825. All these varieties are bound together and made into a single complex system by
certain correspondences of form and meaning. Thus, in regard to form, they are all alike, in the
indicative, augment-preterits to which there does not exist any corresponding present; in regard
to meaning, although in the later or classical language they are simply preterits, exchangeable
with imperfects and perfects, they all alike have in the older language the general value of a
completed past or "perfect", translatable by have done and the like.
826. The aorist-system is a formation of infrequent occurrence in much of the classical
Sanskrit (its forms are found, for example, only twenty-one times in the Nala, eight in the
Hitopadeça, seven in Manu, six each in the Bhagavad-Gītā and Çakuntalā, and sixty-six times,
from fourteen roots, in the first book, of about 2600 lines, of the Rāmāyaṇa: compare 927 b),
and it possesses no participle, nor any modes (excepting in the prohibitive use of its
augmentless forms: see 579; and the so-called precative: see 921 ff.); in the older language, on
the other hand, it is quite common, and has the whole variety of modes belonging to the
present, and sometimes participles. Its description, accordingly, must be given mainly as that of
a part of the older language, with due notice of its restriction in later use.
827. a. In the RV., nearly half the roots occurring show aorist forms, of one or another
class; in the AV., rather less than one third; and in the other texts of the older language
comparatively few aorists occur which are not found in these two.
b. More than fifty roots, in RV. and AV. together, make aorist forms of more than one class
(not taking into account the reduplicated or "causative" aorist); but no law appears to underlie
this variety; of any relation such as is taught by the grammarians, between active of one class
and middle of another as correlative, there is no trace discoverable.
c. Examples are: of classes 1 and 4, adhām and dhāsus from √dhā, ayuji and ayukṣata from
√yuj; — of 1 and 5, agrabham and agrabhīṣma from √grabh, mṛṣṭhās and marṣiṣṭhās from √mṛṣ;
— of 1 and 2, ārta and arāt from √ṛ; — of 2 and 4, avidam and avitsi from √vid find, anijam
and anāikṣīt from √nij; — of 2 and 5, sanéma and asāniṣam from √san; of 2 and 7, aruham and
arukṣat from √ruh; — of 4 and 5, amatsus and amādiṣus from √mad; — of 4 and 6, hāsmahi
and hāsiṣus from √hā; — of 1 and 2 and 4, atnata and atanat and atān from √tan; — of 1 and
4 and 5, abudhran and ábhutsi and bódhiṣat from √budh, ástar and stṛṣīya and

astarīs from √stṛ. Often the second, or second and third, class is represented by only an
isolated form or two.
I. Simple Aorist.
828. This is, of the three principal divisions of aorist, the one least removed from the
analogy of forms already explained; it is like an imperfect, of the root-class or of the á-class,
without a corresponding present indicative, but with (more or less fragmentarily) all the other
parts which go to make up a complete present-system.
1. Root-aorist.
829. a. This formation is in the later language limited to a few roots in आ ā and the root भू
bhū, and is allowed to be made in the active only, the middle using instead the s-aorist (4), or
the iṣ-aorist (5).
b. The roots in आ ā take उस् us as 3d pl. ending, and, as usual, lose their आ ā before it; भू
bhū (as in the perfect: 793 a) retains its vowel unchanged throughout, inserting व् v after it
before the endings अम् am and अन् an of 1st sing. and 3d pl. Thus:
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
अदाम्
ádām
अदाव
ádāva
अदाम
ádāma
अभूवम्
ábhūvam
अभूव
ábhūva
अभूम
ábhūma
2
अदास्
ádās
अदातम्
ádātam
अदात
ádāta
अभूस्
ábhūs
अभूतम्
ábhūtam
अभूत
ábhūta
3
अदात्
ádāt
अदाताम्
ádātām
अस्
ádus
अभूत्
ábhūt
अभूताम्
ábhūtam
अभूवन्
ábhūvan
For the classical Sanskrit, this is the whole story.
830. In the Veda, these same roots are decidedly the most frequent and conspicuous
representatives of the formation: especially the roots gā, dā, dhā, pā drink, sthā, bhū; while
sporadic forms are made from jñā, prā, sā, hā . As to their middle forms, see below, 834 a.
a. Instead of abhūvam, RV. has twice abhuvam. BhP. has agan, 3d pl., instead of agus.
831. But aorists of the same class are also made from a number of roots in ṛ, and a few in
i- and u-vowels (short or long) —

with, as required by the analogy of the tense with an imperfect of the root-class, guṇa-
strengthening in the three persons of the singular.
a. Thus (in the active), from √çru, áçravam and áçrot; from √çri, áçres and áçret; from √kṛ
make, ákaram and ákar (for akars and akart); from vṛ enclose, ā́var (585 a); and so ástar,
aspar. Dual and plural forms are much less frequent than singular; but for the most part they
also show an irregular strengthening of the root-vowel: thus (including augmentless forms),
ákarma and karma and ákarta, vartam, spartam, áhema and áhetana, bhema, açravan; regular
are only avran, ákran, ahyan, and áçriyan.
832. Further, from a few roots with medial (or initial) vowel capable of guṇa-strengthening
and having in general that strengthening only in the singular.
a. Thus, ábhedam and abhet from √bhid; ámok from √muc; yojam from √yuj; rok (VS.) from
√ruj; arodham and arudhma from √rudh; avart from √vṛt; várk from √vṛj (AV. has once avṛk);
adarçam from √dṛç, ā́rdhma from √ṛdh; and adṛçan, avṛjan, açvitan. But chedma, with guṇa,
from √chid, and adarçma (TS.) from √dṛç.
833. Again, from a larger number of roots with a as radical vowel:
a. Of these, gam (with n for m when final or followed by m: 143 a, 212 a) is of decidedly
most frequent occurrence, and shows the greatest variety of forms: thus, ágamam, ágan (2d
and 3d sing.), áganma, aganta (strong form), ágman. The other cases are akran from √kram;
átan from √tan; abhrāṭ from √bhrāj; askan from √skand; asrat from √sraṅs (? VS.); dhak and
daghma from √dagh; ā́naṭ (585 a) and anaṣṭām from √naç; ághas or aghat, ághastām, aghasta,
and ákṣan (for aghsan, like agman) from √ghas; and the 3d pll. in us, ákramus, ayamus,
dabhús, nṛtus (pf.?), mandús.
834. So far only active forms have been considered. In the middle, a considerable part of
the forms are such as are held by the grammarians (881) to belong to the s-aorist, with
omission of the s: they doubtless belong, however, mostly or altogether, here. Thus:
a. From roots ending in vowels, we have adhithās, adhita (also ahita), and adhīmahi;
adithās, adita, and adimahi (and adīmahi from √dā cut); áçīta (?); sīmáhi; ásthithās and ásthita
and ásthiran, forms of ā-roots; — of ṛ-roots, akri, ákṛthās, ákṛta, akrātām, ákrata  (and the
anomalous kránta) ; avri, avṛthās, avṛta; ārta, ārata; mṛthās, amṛta; dhṛthās; adṛthās; astṛta;
ahṛthās; gūrta; — of i and u roots, the only examples are ahvi (? AV., once), áhūmahi, and
ácidhvam. The absence of any analogies whatever for the omission of a s in such forms, and
the occurrence of avri and akri and ákrata, show that their reference to the s-aorist is probably
without sufficient reason.
b. As regards roots ending in consonants, the case is more questionable, since loss of s
after a final consonant before thās and ta (and, of

course, dhvam) would be in many cases required by euphonic rule (233 c ff.). We find,
however, such unmistakable middle inflection of the root-aorist as ayuji, áyukthās, áyukta,
ayujmahi, áyugdhvam, áyujran; ā́ṣṭa and ā́çata; náṅçi; apadi (1st sing.) and apadmahi and
apadran; ámanmahi; gánvahi and áganmahi and ágmata; atnata; ájani  (1st sing.) and ajñata (3d
pl.); from √gam are made agathās and agata, from √tan, atathās and átata, and from √man,
amata, with treatment of the final like that of han in present inflection (637). The ending ran is
especially frequent in 3d pl., being taken by a number of verbs which have no other middle
person of this aorist: thus, agṛbhran, ásṛgran, adṛçran, abudhran, ávṛtran, ajuṣran, akṛpran,
aspṛdhran, avasran, áviçran; and ram is found beside ran in ádṛçram, ábudhram, ásṛgram.
c. From roots of which the final would combine with s to kṣ, it seems more probable that
aorist-forms showing k (instead of ṣ) before the ending belong to the root-aorist: such are
amukthās (and ámugdhvam), apṛkthās and apṛkta, ábhakta, avṛkta, asakthās and asakta, rikthās,
vikthās and vikta, arukta; apraṣṭa, ayaṣṭa, áspaṣṭa, asṛṣṭhās  and ásṛṣṭa, and mṛṣṭhās would be
the same in either case.
d. There remain, as cases of more doubtful belonging, and probably to be ranked in part
with the one formation and in part with the other, according to their period and to the
occurrence of other persons: chitthās, nutthā́s and ánutta and ánuddhvam, patthās, bhitthās,
amatta, atapthās, alipta, asṛpta; and finally, árabdha, alabdha, aruddha, abuddha, ayuddha , and
drogdhās (MBh.: read drugdhās): see 883.
Modes of the Root-aorist.
835. Subjunctive. In subjunctive use, forms identical with the augmentless indicative of this
aorist are much more frequent than the more proper subjunctives. Those to which no
corresponding form with augment occurs have been given above; the others it is unnecessary to
report in detail.
836. a. Of true subjunctives the forms with primary endings are quite few. In the active,
kárāṇi, gāni, gamāni (for bhuvāni, see below, c); kárasi; sthāti, dā́ti and dhā́ti (which are almost
indicative in value), karati, joṣati, padāti, bhédati, rādhati, varjati; sthāthas, karathas  and
karatas, darçathas, çravathas and çrávatas ; and (apparently) karanti, gámanti. In the middle,
joṣase; idhaté (?), kárate, bhójate, yojate, várjate; dhéthe  and dhāithe; karāmahe, dhāmahe,
gámāmahāi.
b. Forms with secondary endings are, in the active, dárçam, bhojam, yojam; káras, tárdas,
párcas, yámas, rādhās, váras; karat, gámat, garat, jóṣat, daghat, padāt, yamat, yodhat, rādhat,
várat, vártat, çrávat, sághat, spárat; kárāma, gamāma, rādhāma; gáman,

garan, dárçan, yaman . No middle forms are classifiable with confidence here.
c. The series bhuvam, bhúvas, bhúvat, bhúvan , and bhuvāni (compare abhuvam: 830 a), and
the isolated çrúvat, are of doubtful belongings; with a different accent, they would seem to be
of the next class; here, a guṇa-strengthening would be more regular (but note the absence of
guṇa in the aorist indicative and the perfect of √bhū).
837. Optative. The optative active of this aorist constitutes, with a s interposed between
mode-sign and personal endings (567), the precative active of the Hindu grammarians, and is
allowed by them to be made from every verb, they recognizing no connection between it and
the aorist. But in the 2d sing. the interposed s is not distinguishable from the personal ending;
and, after the earliest period (see 838), the ending crowds out the sibilant in the 3d sing.,
which thus comes to end in yāt instead of yās (compare 555 a).
a. In the older language, however, pure optative forms, without the s, are made from this
tense. From roots in ā occur (with change of ā to e before the y: 250 d) deyām, dheyām and
dheyus, and stheyāma; in u-vowels, bhūyā́ma; in ṛ, kriyāma; in consonants, açyā́m and açyā́ma
and açyus, vṛjyām, çakyām, yujyāva and yujyā́tām, sāhyāma, and tṛdyus.
b. The optative middle of the root-aorist is not recognized by the Hindu grammarians as
making a part of the precative formation. The RV. has, however, two precative forms of it,
namely padīṣṭá and mucīṣṭa. Much more common in the older language are pure optative
forms: namely, açīya and açīmáhi (this optative is especially common), indhīya, gmīya, murīya,
rucīya; arīta, uhīta, vurīta; idhīmahi, naçīmahi, nasīmahi, pṛcīmahi, mudīmahi, yamīmahi; and
probably, from ā-roots, sīmáhi and dhīmahi (which might also be augmentless indicative, since
adhīmahi and adhītām also occur). All these forms except the three in 3d sing. might be
precative according to the general understanding of that mode, as being of persons which even
by the native authorities are not claimed ever to exhibit the inserted sibilant.
838. Precative active forms of this aorist are made from the earliest period of the language.
In RV., they do not occur from any root which has not also other aorist forms of the same class
to show. The RV. forms are: 1st sing., bhūyāsam; 2d sing., avyās, jñeyās, bhūyā́s, mṛdhyās,
sahyās; 3d sing. (in -yās, for -yāst; RV. has no 3d sing, in yāt, which is later the universal
ending), avyās, açyās, ṛdhyās, gamyā́s, daghyās, peyās, bhūyā́s, yamyās, yūyās, vṛjyās, çrūyās,
sahyās; 1st pl., kriyāsma (beside kriyāma: 837 a). AV. has six 1st persons sing, in - yā́sam, one
2d in -yā́s, one 3d in -yāt (and one in -yās, in a RV. passage), three 1st pl. in - yā́sma (beside
one in yāma, in a RV. passage), and the 2d bhūyāstha (doubtless a false reading: TB. has - sta in
the corresponding passage). From this time on, the pure optative forms nearly

disappear (the exceptions are given in 837 a). But the precative forms are nowhere common,
excepting as made from √bhū; and from no other root is anything like a complete series of
persons quotable (only bhūyāsva and bhūyāstām being wanting; and these two persons have no
representative from any root). All together, active optative or precative forms are made in the
older language from over fifty roots; and the epic and classical texts add them from hardly a
dozen more: see further 925.
839. Imperative. Imperative forms of the root-aorist are not rare in the early language. In
the middle, indeed, almost only the 2d sing. occurs: it is accented either regularly, on the
ending, as kṛṣvá, dhiṣvá, yukṣvá, or on the root, as mátsva, yákṣva, váṅsva, rā́sva, sákṣva; dīṣva
and māsva are not found with accent; the 2d pl. is represented by kṛdhvam, voḍhvam. In the
active, all the persons (2d and 3d) are found in use; examples are: 2d sing., kṛdhí, vṛdhi,
çagdhí, çrudhí, gadhi, yaṁdhí, gahi, māhi, sāhi, mogdhi; 3d sing., gaṁtu, dātu, aṣṭu, çrótu, sótu ;
2d du., dātam, jitam, çaktam, çrutám, bhūtám, spṛtám, gatám, riktám, voḍham, sitam, sutám ; 3d
du., only gaṁtām, dātām, voḍhā́m; 2d pl., gātá, bhūtá, çruta, kṛta, gata, dāta, dhātana ; 3d pl.,
only dhāntu, çruvantu. These are the most regular forms; but irregularities as to both accent
and strengthening are not infrequent. Thus, strong forms in 2d du. and pl. are yaṁtám,
varktam, vartam; kárta, gáṁta (once gáṁtá), yaṁta, vartta, heta, çróta, sóta ; and, with tana,
kártana, gáṁtana, yaṁtana, sotana, and the irregular dhetana (√dhā); in 3d du., gāṁtām. Much
more irregular are yódhi (instead of yuddhí) from √yudh, and bodhí from both √budh and √bhū
(instead of buddhí and bhūdhí). A single form (3d sing.) in tāt is found, namely çastāt. We find
kṛdhi also later (MBh. BhP.).
a. As to 2d persons singular in si from the simple root used in an imperative sense, see
above, 624.
Participles of the Root-aorist.
840. In the oldest language, of the RV., are found a number of participles which must be
reckoned as belonging to this formation.
a. In the active, they are extremely few: namely, kránt, citánt (?), gmánt, sthā́nt, bhidánt,
vṛdhánt, dyutant- (only in composition), and probably ṛdhánt. And BhP. has mṛṣant (but probably
by error, for mṛṣyant).
b. In the middle, they are in RV. much more numerous. The accent is usually on the final of
the stem: thus, arāṇá, idhāṇá, krāṇá, juṣāṇá, tṛṣāṇá, nidāná, piçāná, pṛcāná, prathāná, budhāná,
bhiyāná, manāná, mandāná, yujāná, rucāná, vipāná, vrāṇá, urāṇá, çubhāná, sacāná, suvāná or
svāná, sṛjāná, spṛdhāná, hiyāná; — but sometimes on the root-syllable: thus, cítāna, cyávāna,
rúhāṇa, úhāna (pres.?), vásāna, çúmbhāna; — while a few show both accentuations

(compare 619 d): thus, dṛçāná and dṛ́çāna, dyutāná and dyútāna, yatāná and yátāna; and
cetāna and hrayāṇa occur only in composition. A very few of these are found once or twice in
other texts, namely citāna, dyutāna, ruhāṇa, vasāna, suvāna ; and -kupāna occurs once in Āpast.
(xiv. 28. 4).
841. All together, the roots exhibiting in the older language forms which are with fair
probability to be reckoned to the root-aorist-system are about a hundred and thirty; over eighty
of them make such forms in the RV.
Passive Aorist third person singular.
842. A middle third person singular, of peculiar formation and prevailingly passive meaning,
is made from many verbs in the older language, and has become a regular part of the passive
conjugation, being, according to the grammarians, to be substituted always for the proper third
person of any aorist middle that is used in a passive sense.
843. This person is formed by adding इ i to the root, which takes also the augment, and is
usually strengthened.
a. The ending i belongs elsewhere only to the first person; and this third person apparently
stands in the same relation to a first in i as do, in the middle voice, the regular 3d sing.
perfect, and also the frequent Vedic 3d sing. present of the root-class (613), which are identical
in form with their respective first persons. That a fuller ending has been lost off is extremely
improbable; and hence, as an aorist formation from the simple root, this is most properly
treated here, in connection with the ordinary root-aorist.
844. Before the ending इ i, a final vowel, and usually also a medial अ a before a single
consonant, have the vṛddhi-strengthening; other medial vowels have the guṇa-strengthening if
capable of it (240); after final आ ā is added य् y.
a. Examples (all of them quotable from the older language) are: from roots ending in ā,
ájñāyi, ádhāyi, ápāyi; in other vowels, áçrāyi, ástāvi, áhāvi, ákāri, ástāri ; — from roots with
medial i, u, ṛ, aceti, ácchedi, açeṣi, ábodhi, ámoci, áyoji, ádarçi, asarji, varhi ; from roots with
medial a strengthened, agāmi, ápādi, ayāmi, avāci, vāpi, ásādi (these are all the earlier cases);
with a unchanged, only ájani (and RV. has once jā́ni), and, in heavy syllables, ámyakṣi, vandi,
çaṅsi, syandi; with medial ā, ábhrāji, árādhi; — from roots with initial vowel, ārdhi (only case).
b. According to the grammarians, certain roots in am, and √vadh, retain the a unchanged:
quotable are ajani (or ajāni), agami (or agāmi),

asvani, avadhi, also araci; and there are noted besides, from roots sometimes showing a nasal,
adaṅçi, arambhi, arandhi, ajambhi, abhañji or abhāji, alambhi (always, with prepositions) or
alābhi, astambhi; ÇB. has asañji.
c. Augmentless forms, as in all other like cases, are met with, with either indicative or
subjunctive value: examples (besides the two or three already given) are: dhā́yi, çrā́vi, bhāri,
reci, védi, roci, jáni, pā́di, sā́di, ardhi. The accent, when present, is always on the root-syllable
(SV. dhāyí is doubtless a false reading).
845. These forms are made in RV. from forty roots, and all the other earlier texts combined
add only about twenty to the number; from the later language are quotable thirty or forty
more; in the epics they are nearly unknown. When they come from roots of neuter meaning, as
gam, pad, sad, bhrāj, rādh, ruc, sañj , they have (like the so-called passive participle in ta: 952)
a value equivalent to that of other middle forms; in a case or two (RV. vii. 73. 3 [?]; VS. xxviii.
15; TB. ii. 6. 102) they appear even to be used transitively.
2. The a-aorist.
846. a. This aorist is in the later language allowed to be made from a large number of roots
(near a hundred). It is made in both voices, but is rare in the middle, most of the roots forming
their middle according to the s-class (878 ff.) or the iṣ-class (898 ff.).
b. Its closest analogy is with the imperfect of the á-class (751 ff.); its inflection is the same
with that in all particulars; and it takes in general a weak form of root — save the roots in ऋ ṛ
(three or four only), which have the guṇa-strengthening.
c. As example of inflection may be taken the root िसच् sic pour. Thus:
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
अिसचम्
ásicam
अिसचाव
ásicāva
अिसचाम
ásicāma
अिसचे
ásice
अिसचाविह
ásicāvahi
अिसचामिह
ásicāmahi
2
अिसचस्
ásicas
अिसचतम्
ásicatam
अिसचत
ásicata
अिसचथास्
ásicathās
अिसचेथाम्
ásicethām
अिसचम्
asicadhvam
3
अिसचत्
ásicat
अिसचताम्
ásicatām
अिसचन्
ásican
अिसचत
ásicata
अिसचेताम्
ásicetām
अिसच
ásicanta

847. The a-aorist makes in the RV. a small figure beside the root-aorist, being represented
by less than half the latter's number of roots. It becomes, however, more common later (it is
the only form of aorist which is made from more verbs in AV. than in RV.); and in Veda and
Brāhmaṇa together about eighty roots exhibit the formation more or less fully. Of these a large
number (fully half) are of the type of the roots which make their present-system according to
the á-class, having a vowel capable of guṇa-strengthening before a final consonant (754): thus,
with i, chid, bhid, nij, ric, riṣ, lip, vid , 1 çiṣ (çās), 2 çiṣ, çriṣ, çliṣ, sic, sridh ; — with u, krudh,
kṣudh, guh, duṣ, dyut, druh, puṣ, budh, bhuj, muc, mruc, yuj, ruc, rud, rudh, muh, ruh, çuc; —
with ṛ, ṛdh, kṛt, gṛdh, gṛh, tṛp, tṛṣ, tṛh, dṛp, dṛç, dhṛṣ, nṛt, mṛdh, mṛṣ, vṛt, vṛdh, vṛṣ, sṛp, hṛṣ. A
small number end in vowels: thus, ṛ, kṛ, sṛ (which have the guṇa-strengthening throughout), hi
(? ahyat once in AV.), and several in ā, apparent transfers from the root-class by the weakening
of their ā to a: thus, khyā, hvā, vyā, çvā, and dā and dhā; and āsthat, regarded by the
grammarians as aorist to √as throw, is doubtless a like formation from √sthā. A few have a
penultimate nasal in the present and elsewhere, which in this aorist is lost: thus, bhraṅç, taṅs,
dhvaṅs, sraṅs, krand, randh. Of less classifiable character are aç, kram, gam, ghas, tam, çam,
çram, tan, san, sad, āp, das, yas, çak, dagh. The roots pat, naç, vac form the tense-stems papta,
neça, voca, of which the first is palpably and the other two are probably the result of
reduplication; but the language has lost the sense of their being such, and makes other
reduplicated aorists from the same roots (see below, 854).
a. Many of these aorists are simply transfers of the root-aorist to an a-inflection.
Conspicuous examples are akarat etc. and agamat etc. (in the earliest period only akar and
agan).
848. The inflection of this aorist is in general so regular that it will be sufficient to give
only examples of its Vedic forms. We may take as model avidam, from √vid find, of which the
various persons and modes are more frequent and in fuller variety than those of any other
verb. Only the forms actually quotable are instanced; those of which the examples found are
from other verbs than vid are bracketed. Thus:
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
ávidam
ávidāva
ávidāma
ávide
[ávidāvahi]
ávidāmahi
2
ávidas
[ávidata]
[ávidathās]
3
ávidat
ávidan
[avidata]
[avidetām]
ávidanta
a. The middle forms are rare in the earlier language, as in the later: we have áhve etc.,
ákhye etc., ávide (?) and avidanta, avocathās and avocāvahi (and avidāmahe GB. and asicāmahe
KB. are doubtless to be amended to -mahi).

b. Augmentless forms, with indicative or subjunctive value, are not infrequent. Examples,
showing accent on the tense-sign, according to the general analogies of the formation, are:
ruhám, sṛpas, bhuját, vidát, aratām, vocata, çakan; vidata  and vyáta (3d sing.), arāmahi,
çiṣāmahi, vidánta, budhánta, mṛṣanta (for exceptions as regards accent, see below, 853).
Modes of the a-aorist.
840. The subjunctive forms of this aorist are few; those which occur are instanced below, in
the method which was followed for the indicative:
1
[vidā́va]
vidāma
[vidāmahe]
2
vidā́si
vidā́s
vidāthas
vidātha
3
vidā́t
[vidātāi?]
a. The ending thana is found once, in riṣāthana. Of middle forms occur only çíṣātāi (AV.:
but doubtless misreading for çíṣyātāi) and çiṣāmahe (AV., for RV. çiṣāmahi). The form sádathas
seems an indicative, made from a secondary present-stem.
850. The optatives are few in the oldest language, but become more frequent, and in the
Brāhmaṇas are not rare. Examples are: in active, bhideyam, vidéyam, sanéyam (TB. once
sanem) ; vidés, games; gamet, vocet; gametam; gaméma, çakéma, sanéma; vareta ; in middle,
(only) videya; gamemahi, vanemahi: ruhethās etc. in the epics must be viewed rather as present
forms of the á-class.
a. A single middle precative form occurs, namely videṣṭa (AV., once); it is so isolated that
how much may be inferred from it is very questionable.
851. A complete series of active imperative forms are made from √sad (including sadatana,
2d pl.), and the middle sadantām. Other imperatives are very rare: namely, sána, sára, ruha,
vidá; ruhátam, vidátam; khyáta. TS. has once vṛdhātu (compare 740).
Participles of the a-aorist.
852. a. The active participles tṛpánt, ríṣant or rī́ṣant, vṛdhánt, çiṣánt, çucánt, sádant , and (in
participial compounds, 1309) kṛtant- , guhant- , vidant- (all RV.), are to be assigned with
plausibility to this aorist.
b. Likewise the middle participles guhámāna, dhṛṣámāṇa, dásamāna 
(?), nṛtámāna,
çucámāna, and perhaps vṛdhāná, sridhāná.
Irregularities of the a-aorist.
853. A few irregularities and peculiarities may be noticed here. The roots in ṛ, which (847)
show a strengthening like that of the

present of the unaccented a-class, have likewise the accent upon the radical syllable, like that
class: thus, from √ṛ, áranta (augmentless 3d pl.), sárat and sára. The root sad follows the same
rule: thus, sádatam; and from √san are found sánas and sánat and sánema and sána, beside
sanéyam and sanéma. It is questionable whether these are not true analogues of the bhū-class
(unaccented a-class) present-system. On the other hand, rúhat (beside ruhám, ruhā́va, ruhátam),
çíṣat and çíṣātāi (?), and ríṣant or rī́sant are more isolated cases. In view of such as these, the
forms from the stem bhúva and çrúva (836 c) are perhaps to be referred hither. From √vac,
the optative is accented vocéyam, vocés, vocéma, vocéyus; elsewhere the accent is on the root-
syllable: thus, vóce, vócat, vócati, vócanta.
854. a. The stem voc has in Vedic use well-nigh assumed the value of a root; its forms are
very various and of frequent use, in RV. especially far outnumbering in occurrences all other
forms from √vac. Besides those already given, we find vocā (1st sing, impv.) and vocāti,
vocāvahāi; voces, voceya, vocemahi; vocatāt (2d sing.), vocatu, vocatam, vocata.
b. Of the stem neça from √naç only neçat occurs.
c. The root çās (as in some of its present forms: 639) is weakened to çiṣ, and makes
açiṣam.
855. Isolated forms which have more or less completely the aspect of indicative presents are
made in the oldest language from some roots beside the aorist-systems of the first two classes.
It must be left for maturer research to determine how far they may be relics of original
presents, and how far recent productions, made in the way of conversion of the aorist-stem to a
root in value.
a. Such forms are the following: from √kṛ make, kárṣi, kṛthas, kṛtha, kṛṣe; from √gam, gathá;
from √ci gather, ceti; from √dā give, dā́ti, dāta; from √dhā put, dhāti; from √pā drink, pāthás,
pānti; from √bhṛ, bharti; from √muc, mucánti; from √rudh, rudhmas (?); from √vṛt, vartti.
II. (3) Reduplicated Aorist.
856. The reduplicated aorist is different from the other forms of aorist in that it has come
to be attached in almost all cases to the derivative (causative etc.) conjugation in अय áya, as the
aorist of that conjugation, and is therefore liable to be made from all roots which have such a
conjugation, beside the aorist or aorists which belong to their primary conjugation. Since,
however, the connection of

the two is not a formal one (the aorist being made directly from the root, and not from the
causative stem), but rather a matter of established association, owing to kinship of meaning, the
formation and inflection of this kind of aorist is best treated here, along with the others.
857. Its characteristic is a reduplication of the radical syllable, by which it is assimilated, on
the one hand, to the imperfect of the reduplicating class (656 ff.), and, on the other hand, to
the so-called pluperfect (817 ff.). But the aorist reduplication has taken on a quite peculiar
character, with few traces left even in the Veda of a different condition which may have
preceded this.
858. a. As regards, indeed, the consonant of the reduplication, it follows the general rules
already given (590). And the quality of the reduplicated vowel is in general as in the formations
already treated: it needs only to be noted that an a-vowel and ṛ (or ar) are usually (for
exceptions, see below, 860) repeated by an i-vowel — as they are, to a considerable extent, in
the reduplicated present also (660).
b. But in regard to quantity, this aorist aims always at establishing a diversity between the
reduplicating and radical syllables, making the one heavy and the other light. And the
preference is very markedly for a heavy reduplication and a light root-syllable — which relation
is brought about wherever the conditions allow. Thus:
859. If the root is a light syllable (having a short vowel followed by a single consonant), the
reduplication is made heavy.
a. And this, usually by lengthening the reduplicating vowel, with ī for radical a or ṛ or ḷ. (in
the single root containing that vowel): thus, arīriṣam, adūduṣam, ajījanam, avīvṛdham, acīkḷpam .
The great majority of reduplicated aorists are of this form.
b. If, however, the root begins with two consonants, so that the reduplicating syllable will
be heavy whatever the quantity of its vow-

el, the vowel remains short: thus, acikṣipam, acukrudham, atitrasam, apispṛçam.
860. If the root is a heavy syllable (having a long vowel, or a short before two consonants),
the vowel of the reduplication is short: and in this case अ a or आ ā, and ऋ ṛ (if it occurs), are
reduplicated by अ a.
a. Thus, adidīkṣam, abubhūṣam (not quotable), adadakṣam, adadhāvam, atataṅsam. And, in
the cases in which a root should both begin and end with two consonants, both syllables would
be necessarily heavy, notwithstanding the short vowel in the former: thus, apapraccham,
acaskandam (but no such forms are found in use).
b. A medial ṛ is allowed by the grammarians to retain the strengthening of the causative
stem, together with, of course, reduplication by a: thus, acakarṣat, avavartat (beside acīkṛṣat,
avīvṛtat); but no such forms have been met with in use.
c. These aorists are not distinguishable in form from the so-called pluperfects (817 ff.).
861. a. In order, however, to bring about the favored relation of heavy reduplication and
light radical syllable, a heavy root is sometimes made light: either by shortening its vowel, as in
arīradham from √rādh, avīvaçam from √vāç, asīṣadham from √sādh, ajījivam from √jīv, adīdipam
(K. and later: BV. has didīpas) from √dīp, abībhiṣam from √bhīṣ, asūsucam from √sūc; or by
dropping a penultimate nasal, as in acikradam from √krand, asiṣyadam from √syand.
b. In those cases in which (1047) an aorist is formed directly from a causal stem in āp, the
ā is abbreviated to i: thus, atiṣṭhipam etc., ajijñipat (but KSS. ajijñapat), jīhipas, ajījipata (but
VS. ajījapata); but from çrap comes açiçrapāma (ÇB.).
862. Examples of this aorist from roots with initial vowel are very rare; the older language
has only āmamat (or amamat) from √am, āpipan (ÇB.: BAU. āpipipat) from √āp, and arpipam
(augmentless) from the causative stem arp of √ṛ — in which latter the root is excessively
abbreviated. The grammarians give other similar formations, as ārcicam from √arc, āubjijam
from √ubj, ārjiham from √arh, āicikṣam from √īkṣ, ārdidham from √ṛdh. Compare the similar
reduplication in desiderative stems: 1029 b.
863. Of special irregularities may be mentioned:
a. From √dyut is made (V.B.) the stem didyuta, taking its reduplicating vowel from the
radical semivowel. From √gup, instead of jūgupa (B.S.), JB. has jugūpa, and some texts (B.S.)
have jugupa; and jīhvara (B.) is met with beside the regular jihvara (V.B.). In caccha-

da (Nir.), and the more or less doubtful paprátha and çaçvacá and sasvaja (RV.) we have a
instead of i in the reduplication.
b. In support of their false view of this aorist as made from the causative stem instead of
directly from the root, the native grammarians teach that roots ending in an u-vowel may
reduplicate with i, as representing the ā of the strengthened stem: thus, bībhava from bhāv-aya,
as well as būbhuva from bhū. No example of such a formation, however, is met with except
ápiplavam (ÇB., once); against it we find dudruva, būbhuva, rūruva, çuçruva, and others.
c. As to apaptam, avocam, and aneçam, see above, 847.
864. The inflection of the reduplicated aorist is like that of an imperfect of the second
general conjugation: that is to say, it has अ a as final stem-vowel, with all the peculiarities
which the presence of that vowel conditions (738 a). Thus, from √jan give birth (stem jījana):
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
अजीजनम्
ájījanam
अजीजनाव
ájījanāva
अजीजनाम
ájījanāma
अजीजने
ájījane
अजीजनाविह
ájījanāvahi
अजीजनामिह
ájījanāmahi
2
अजीजनस्
ájījanas
अजीजनतम्
ájījanatam
अजीजनत
ájījanata
अजीजनथास्
ájījanathās
अजीजनेथाम्
ájījanethām
अजीजनम्
ájījanadhvam
3
अजीजनत्
ájījanat
अजीजनताम्
ájījanatām
अजीजनन्
ájījanan
अजीजनत
ájījanata
अजीजनेताम्
ájījanetām
अजीजन
ájījananta
865. The middle forms are rare in the older language (the 3d pl. is decidedly the most common
of them, being made from eleven roots; the 3d s. from seven); but all, both active and middle,
are quotable except 1st and 2d du. middle and 1st du. active.
a. Atītape appears to be once used (RV.) as 3d sing., with passive sense.
866. A final ṛ has the guṇa-strengthening before the endings: thus, acīkarat, apīparam,
atītaras, dīdaras, adīdharat, amīmarat, avīvaran, jihvaras. Of similar strengthened forms from ī
a n d u-roots are found apiprayan (TS.), abībhayanta (RV.), apiplavam (ÇB.), acucyavat (K.),
açuçravat (MS.), atuṣṭavam (RV.). Not many roots ending in other vowels than ṛ make this
aorist: see below, 868.
867. Forms of the inflection without union-vowel are occasionally met with: namely, from
roots ending in consonants, síṣvap (2d sing., augmentless) from √svap, and açiçnat from √çnath;
from roots in ṛ or ar, dīdhar (2d sing.), and ajīgar (2d and 3d sing.); for roots in i- and u-
vowels, see 868. Of 3d pl. in us are found almost only a form

or two from i- and u-roots, with guṇa before the ending: thus, açiçrayus, ácucyavus, açuçravus,
asuṣavus; but also abībhajus (ÇB.), and nīnaçus (MBh.).
868. In the later language, a few roots are said by the grammarians to make this aorist as a
part of their primary conjugation: they are çri and çvi, dru and aru, kam, and dhā suck (çvi
and dhā optionally).
a. In the older language are found from √çri açiçret and açiçrayus (noticed in the preceding
paragraph) and açiçriyat (ÇB.); from √dru, adudrot and adudruvat (TB.: not used as aorist);
from √sru, asusrot and (augmentless) susros and susrot; from √kam, acīkametām and -manta
(B.S.). Of forms analogous with these occur a number from roots in u or ū: thus, anūnot and
nūnot from √nu; yūyot from √yu separate; dūdhot from √dhū; apupot from √pū; tūtos and tūtot
from √tu; asuṣot from √sū; — and one or two from roots in i or ī: thus, siṣet from √si (or sā)
bind; amīmet from √mā bellow; apipres (with apiprayan, noticed above) from √prī (and the
"imperfects" from dīdhī etc., 676, are of corresponding form). And from √cyu are made, with
union-vowel ī, acucyavīt and acucyavītana. Few of these forms possess a necessarily causative or
a decidedly aoristic value, and it is very doubtful whether they should not be assigned to the
perfect-system.
b. From the later language are quotable only açiçriyat etc. (3d pl., -yan or -yus) and
adudruvat.
Modes of the Reduplicated Aorist.
869. a. As in other preterit formations, the augmentless indicative persons of this aorist are
used subjunctively, and they are very much more frequent than true subjunctives.
b. Of the latter are found only rīradhā (1st sing.); tītapāsi; cīkḷpāti and sīṣadhāti, and
pispṛçati (as if corresponding to an indicative apispṛk, like açiçnat); and perhaps the 1st sing.
mid. çaçvacāí.
c. The augmentless indicative forms are accented in general on the reduplication: thus,
dī́dharas, nī́naças; jī́janat, pī́parat; jī́janan; also síṣvap; but, on the other hand, we have also
pīpárat, çiçráthas and çiçnáthat, and dudrávat and tuṣṭávat (which may perhaps belong to the
perfect: compare 810). According to the native grammarians, the accent rests either on the
radical syllable or on the one that follows it.
870. Optative forms are even rarer. The least questionable case is the middle "precative"
rīriṣīṣṭa (ririṣīṣṭa has been ranked above with sāsahīṣṭa, as a perfect: 812 b). Cucyuvīmahi and
cucyavīrata belong either here or to the perfect-system.
871. Of imperatives, we have the indubitable forms pūpurantu and çiçrathantu. And jigṛtám
and jigṛtá, and didhṛtam and didhṛtá,

a n d jajastám (all RV. only), and perhaps suṣūdáta (AV.), are to be referred hither, as
corresponding to the indicatives (without union-vowel) ajīgar 
and adīdhar: their short
reduplicating vowel and their accent assimilate them closely to the reduplicated imperfects (656
ff.) with which we are probably to regard this aorist as ultimately related.
872. No participle is found belonging to the reduplicated aorist.
873. The number of roots from which this aorist is met with in the earlier language is about
a hundred and twenty. In the later Sanskrit it is unusual; in the series of later texts mentioned
above (826) it occurs only twice; and it has been found quotable from hardly fifty roots in the
whole epic and classical literature.
III. Sigmatic or Sibilant Aorist.
874. a. The common tense-sign of all the varieties of this aorist is a स् s (convertible to ष् ṣ:
180) which is added to the root in forming the tense-stem.
b. This sibilant has no analogues among the class-signs of the present-system; but it is to be
compared with that which appears (and likewise with or without the same union-vowel i) in the
stems of the future tense-system (932 ff.) and of the desiderative conjugation (1027 ff.).
c. To the root thus increased the augment is prefixed and the secondary endings are added.
875. In the case of a few roots, the sibilant tense-stem (always ending in  kṣ) is further
increased by an अ a, and the inflection is nearly like that of an imperfect of the second or a-
conjugation.
876. a. In the vast majority of cases, the sibilant is the final of the tense-stem, and the
inflection is like that of an imperfect of the first or non-a-conjugation.
b. And these, again, fall into two nearly equal and strongly marked classes, according as
the sibilant is added immediately to the final of the root, or with an auxiliary vowel इ i, making
the tense-sign इष् iṣ. Finally, before this इष् iṣ the root is in a very small number of cases
increased by a स् s, making the whole addition िसष् siṣ.

877. We have, then, the following classification for the varieties of sibilant-aorist:
A. With endings added directly to the sibilant:
4. with स् s simply after the root: s-aorist;
5. with इ i before the स् s: iṣ-aorist;
6. the same, with स् s at end of root: siṣ-aorist.
B. With अ a added to the sibilant before the endings:
7. with sibilant and अ a: sa-aorist.
a. As regards the distinction between the fourth and fifth forms, it may be said in a general
way that those roots incline to take the auxiliary i in the aorist which take it also in other
formations; but it is impossible to lay down any strict rules as to this accordance. Compare 903.
4. The s-aorist.
878. The tense-stem of this aorist is made by adding स् s to the augmented root, of which
also the vowel is usually strengthened.
879. The general rules as to the strengthening of the root-vowel are these:
a. A final vowel (including ऋ ṛ) has the vṛddhi-change in the active, and (excepting ऋ ṛ)
guṇa in the middle: thus, from √नी lead, active stem अनैष् anāiṣ, middle stem अनेष् aneṣ; from √ु
çru hear, अौष् açrāuṣ and अोष् açroṣ; from √ kṛ make, अकाष akārṣ and अष् akṛṣ.
b. A medial vowel has the vṛddhi-change in the active, and remains unaltered in the middle:
thus, from √छ chand seem, active stem अा acchānts, middle stem अ acchants; from
√िरच् ric leave, अरै arāikṣ and अिर arikṣ; from √ध् rudh obstruct, अरौ arāuts and अ aruts;
from √ज् sṛj pour out, अा asrākṣ and अ asṛkṣ.
880. a. The endings are the usual secondary ones, with उस् us (not अन् an) in 3d pl. act.,
and अत ata (not अ anta) in 3d pl. mid.

b. But before स् s and त् t of 2d and 3d sing. act. is in the later language always inserted an
ई ī, making the endings ईस् īs and ईत् īt.
c. This insertion is unknown in the earliest language (of the BV.): see below, 888.
881. a. Before endings beginning with t or th, the tense-sign s is (233 c–e) omitted after the
final consonant of a root — unless this be r, or n or m (converted to anusvāra).
b. The same omission is of course made before dhvam after a consonant; and after a vowel
the sibilant is either omitted or assimilated (the equivalence of dhv and ddhv in the theories of
the grammarians and the practice of the manuscripts makes it impossible to say which: 232);
and then the ending becomes ḍhvam, provided the sibilant, if retained, would have been ṣ (226
c): thus, astoḍhvam and avṛḍhvam (beside astoṣata and avṛṣata) ; dṛḍhvam (√dṛ regard: ÇB.,
once), which is to dṛthās (2d sing.) as avṛḍhvain and avṛṣata to avri and avṛthās; and kṛḍhvam
(M.).
c. According to the grammarians, the omission of s before t and th takes place also after a
short vowel (the case can occur only in the 2d and 3d sing, mid.); but we have seen above (834
a) that this is to be viewed rather as a substitution in those persons of the forms of the root-
aorist. Neither in the earlier nor in the later language, however, does any example occur of an
aorist-form with s retained after a short vowel before these endings.
d. After the final sonant aspirate of a root, the sibilant before the same endings is said by
the Hindu grammarians to disappear altogether, the combination of the aspirate with the th or
t of the ending being then made according to the ordinary rule for such cases (160): thus, from
the stem arāuts, for arāudh-s, is made arāuddha, as if from arāudh+ta directly. No example of
such a form is quotable from the literature; but the combination is established by the
occurrence of other similar cases (233 f). In the middle, in like manner, aruts+ta becomes
aruddha, as if from arudh+ta; but all such forms admit also of being understood as of the root-
aorist. Those that have been found to occur were given above (834 d); probably they belong at
least in part to this aorist.
e. From the three nasal roots gam, tan, man are made the 2d and 3d sing. mid. persons
agathās and agata, atathās and atata, and amata (amathās not quotable), reckoned by the
native grammarians as s-aorist forms, made, after loss of their final root-nasal, with loss also of
the sibilant after a short vowel. They are doubtless better referred to the root-aorist. But JB.
has a corresponding 1st sing. atasi from √tan.
882. As examples of the inflection of this variety of

sibilant aorist we may take the roots नी nī lead, and िछ chid cut off. Thus:
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
अनैषम्
ánāiṣam
अनै
ánāiṣva
अनै
ánāiṣma
अनेिष
áneṣi
अनेिह
áneṣvahi
अनेिह
áneṣmahi
2
अनैषीस्
ánāiṣīs
अनैम्
ánāiṣṭam
अनै
ánāiṣṭa
अनेास्
áneṣṭhās
अनेषाथाम्
áneṣāthām
अनेवम्
áneḍhvam
3
अनैषीत्
ánāiṣīt
अनैाम्
ánāiṣṭām
अनैषुस्
ánāiṣus
अने
áneṣṭa
अनेषाताम्
áneṣātām
अनेषत
áneṣata
active.
s.
d.
p.
1
अैम्
ácchāitsam
अै
ácchāitsva
अै
ácchāitsma
2
अैीस्
ácchāitsīs
अैम्
ácchāittam
अै
ácchāitta
3
अैीत्
ácchāitsīt
अैाम्
ácchāittām
अैुस्
ácchāitsus
middle.
s.
d.
p.
1
अिि
ácchitsi
अििह
ácchitsvahi
अििह
ácchitsmahi
2
अिास्
ácchitthās
अिाथाम्
ácchitsāthām
अिम्
ácchiddhvam
3
अि
ácchitta
अिाताम्
ácchitsātām
अित
ácchitsata
a. From √rudh obstruct, the 2d and 3d du. and 2d pl. act. and the 2d and 3d sing. mid. would
b e árāuddham, árāuddhām, árāuddha, áruddhās, áruddha; from √sṛj pour out, ásrāṣṭam,
ásrāṣṭām, asrāṣṭa, asṛṣṭhās, asṛṣṭa; from √dṛç see, ádrāṣṭam etc. (as from sṛj). But from √kṛ do
the same persons in the active are ákārṣṭam, ákārṣṭām, ákārṣṭa; from √tan stretch they are
átāṅstam, átāṅstām, átāṅsta.
883. The omission of s in the active persons ( ácchāittam, ácchāittām, ácchāitta) is a case of
very rare occurrence; all the quotable examples were given above (233 e). As to the like
omission in middle persons, see 881. The ChU. has twice ávāstam for avāts-tam (√vas dwell):
this may be viewed as another case of total disappearance of the sibilant, and consequent
restoration of the final radical to its original form.

884. Certain roots in ā weaken the ā in middle inflection to i (as also in the root-aorist:
above, 834 a): these are said to be sthā, dā, and dhā; in the older language have been noted
ádiṣi and adiṣata from √dā give (and adiṣi perhaps once from √dā bind) , adhiṣi and adhiṣata
(with the optative dhiṣīya) from √dhā put, and asthiṣata; also agīṣṭhās and agīṣata from √gā go
(with adhi).
a. The middle inflection of the aorist of √dā would be, then, according to the grammarians:
ádiṣi, ádithās, ádita; ádiṣvahi, ádiṣāthām, ádiṣātām; ádiṣmahi, ádiḍhvam, ádiṣata .
885. Roots ending in changeable ṛ (so-called roots in ṝ: 242) are said by the grammarians to
convert this vowel to īr in middle forms: thus, astīrṣi, astīrṣṭhās etc. (from √stṛ); of such forms,
however, has been found in the older language only akīrṣata, PB.
886. The s-aorist is made in the older language from about a hundred and forty roots (in
RV., from about seventy; in AV., from about fifty, of which fifteen are additional to those in
RV.); and the epic and classical literature adds but a very small number. It has in the Veda
certain peculiarities of stem-formation and inflection, and also the full series of modes — of
which the optative middle is retained also later as a part of the "precative" (but see 925 b).
887. Irregularities of stem-formation are as follows:
a. The strengthening of the root-syllable is now and then irregularly made or omitted: thus,
ayokṣīt (AB.), chetsīs (B.S.; also occurs in MBh., which has further yotsīs), rotsīs (KU.); amatsus
(RV.); ayāṁsi and arāutsi (AB.), asākṣi etc. (V.B.: √sah) , māṅsta (AY.) and māṅstām (TA.);
lopsīya (U.); and MBh. has drogdhās. From √saj is made sān̄kṣīt (U. etc.), and from √majj,
amān̄kṣīt (not quotable). The form ayun̄kṣmahi (BhP.) is doubtless a false reading.
b. A radical final nasal is lost in agasmahi (RV.) and gasāthām (TA.) from √gam, and in the
optatives masīya and vasīmahi (RV.) from √√man and van.
c. The roots hū, dhū, and nū have ū instead of o in the middle: thus, ahūṣata, adhūṣata,
anūṣi and anūṣātām and anūṣata; √dhur (or dhūrv) makes adhūrṣata.
d. ÇB. has once atrāsatām for atrāstām (√trā).
888. The principal peculiarity of the older language in regard to inflection is the frequent
absence of ī in the endings of 2d and 3d sing. act., and the consequent loss of the consonant-
ending, and sometimes of root-finals (150). The forms without ī are the only ones found in RV.
and K., and they outnumber the others in AV. and TS.; in the Brāhmaṇas they grow rarer (only
one, adrāk, occurs in GB.; one, ayāṭ, in KB.; and two, adrāk and ayāṭ, in ÇB.; PB. has none).

889. If the root ends in a vowel, only the consonant of the ending is necessarily lost: thus,
aprās (for both aprās-s and aprās-t) from √prā; and in like manner ahās from √hā; — ajāis (for
ajāiṣ-t) from √ji; and in like manner acāis from √ci, and nāis (augmentless) from √nī; — and
yāus (for ayāuṣ-t) from √yu.
a. But (as in other like cases: 555 a) the ending is sometimes preserved at the expense of
the tense-sign; and we have in 3d sing. ajāit (beside ajāis and ajāiṣīt) from √ji; and in like
manner acāit, açrāit, ahāit, nāit (no examples have been noted except from roots in i and ī):
compare ayās and srās, 2d sing., 890 a.
890. a. If the root (in either its simple or strengthened form) ends in a consonant, the
tense-sign is lost with the ending. Thus, abhār (for abhārṣ-t: beside abhārṣam, abhārṣṭām) from
√bhṛ; other like cases are ahār. and (from roots in ar) akṣār, atsār, asvār, hvār. Further, ārāik
(583 a: for arāikṣ-t) from √ric; like cases are açvāit from √çvit and (from roots with medial u)
adyāut from √dyut, arāut from √rudh, and māuk from √muc. Further, from roots ending in the
palatals and h, aprāk from √pṛc, asrāk from √sṛj, abhāk from √bhaj, adrāk from √dṛç, adhāk
from √dah; but, with a different change of the final, ayāṭ from √yaj, aprāṭ from √pṛch, avāṭ from
√vah, and asrāṭ from √sṛj; and (above, 146 a) srās appears to stand twice in AV. for srāṣ-s from
√sṛj; RV. has also twice ayās from √yaj. Further, from roots ending in a nasal, atān from √tan,
khān from √khan, ayān and anān from √√yam and nam (143 a).
b. If, again, the roots end in a double consonant, the latter of the two is lost along with
tense-sign and ending: thus, acchān (for acchānts-t; beside acchāntta and acchāntsus) from
√chand; and other like cases are akrān, askān, and asyān.
891. A relic of this peculiarity of the older inflection has been preserved to the later
language in the 2d sing. bhāis, from √bhī.
Modes of the s-aorist.
892. The indicative forms without augment are used in a subjunctive sense, especially after
mā́ prohibitive, and are not uncommon. Examples with accent, however, are extremely rare;
there has been noted only váṅsi, middle; judging from this, the tone would be found on the
radical syllable. According to the Hindu grammarians, it may be laid on either root or ending.
893. Proper subjunctive forms are not rare in BV., but are markedly less common in the
later Vedic texts, and very seldom met with in the Brāhmaṇas. They are regularly made with
guṇa-strengthening of the radical vowel, in both active and middle, and with accent on the root.

a. The forms with primary endings are: in active, stoṣāṇi; darṣasi; neṣati, parṣati, pāsati,
matsati, yoṣati, vakṣati, sakṣati; dā́sathas, dhāsathas, párṣathas, vakṣathas, varṣathas; pāsatas,
yaṁsatas, yakṣatas, vakṣatas; dhāsatha, neṣatha, párṣatha, mátsatha; — in middle, naṁsāi,
máṅsāi; máṅsase; kraṁsate, trāsate, darṣate, máṅsate, yakṣate, rāsate, vaṅsate, sākṣate, hāsate;
trā́sāthe (not trāsāithe, as we should rather expect); náṁsante, máṅsante: and, with the fuller
ending in 3d sing., mā́sātāi.
b. The forms with secondary endings are (active only): jéṣas, vákṣas; dárṣat, néṣat, pákṣat,
párṣat, préṣat, yákṣat, yóṣat, váṅsat, vákṣat, véṣat, sátsat, chantsat, etc. (some twenty others);
yakṣatām; váṅsāma, sā́kṣāma, stoṣāma; parṣan, yaṁsan, yoṣan, rā́san, vakṣan, çéṣan, çróṣan . Of
these, yakṣat and vakṣat are found not rarely in the Brāhmaṇas; any others, hardly more than
sporadically.
894. Of irregularities are to be noted the following:
a. The forms dṛ́kṣase and pṛkṣase (2d sing. mid.) lack the guṇa-strengthening.
b. Jeṣam, stoṣam, and yoṣam (AV. yūṣam, with ū for o as in anūṣata etc.) appear to be first
persons formed under government of the analogy of the second and third — unless they are
relics of a state of things anterior to the vṛddhi-strengthening: in which case jeṣma is to be
compared with them (we should expect jāiṣma or jeṣāma).
c. From roots in ā are made a few forms of problematic character: namely, yeṣam (only
case in RV.), khyeṣam, jñeṣam, geṣam and geṣma, deṣma, seṣam and set, stheṣam and stheṣus.
Their value is optative. The analogy of jeṣam and jeṣma suggests the possibility of their
derivation from i-forms of the ā-roots; or the sibilant might be of a precative character (thus,
yā-ī-s-am). That they really belong to the iṣ-aorist appears highly improbable.
d. The RV. has a few difficult first persons middle in se, which are perhaps best noted here.
They are: 1. from the simple root, kṛṣe, hiṣe (and ohiṣe?), stuṣé; 2. from present-stems, arcase,
ṛñjase, yajase, gāyiṣe, gṛṇīṣé and punīṣé. They have the value of indicative present. Compare
below, 897 b.
895. Optative forms of this aorist are made in the middle only, and they have in 2d and 3d
sing. always the precative s before the endings. Those found to occur in the older language
are: diṣīya, dhiṣīya, bhakṣīyá, masīya (for maṅsīya) , mukṣīya, rāṣīya, lopsīya, sākṣīya, stṛṣīya;
maṅsīṣṭhās; darṣīṣṭa, bhakṣīṣṭa, maṅsīṣṭha, mṛkṣīṣṭa; bhakṣīmahi, dhukṣīmáhi, maṅsīmáhi,
vaṅsīmáhi, vasīmahi, sakṣīmáhi; maṅsīrata. PB. has bhukṣiṣīya, which should belong to a siṣ-
aorist. The RV. form trā́sīthām (for trāsīyāthām or trāsāthām) is an isolated anomaly.
a. This optative makes a part of the accepted "precative" of the later language: see below,
923, 925 b.

896. Imperative persons from this aorist are extremely rare: we find the 2d sing. act. neṣa
and parṣa and the 2d pl. yaṁsata (from a-stems, and showing rather, therefore, a treatment of
the aorist-stem as a root), and the 3d sing. mid. rāsatām and pl. rāsantām (of which the same
may be said).
Participles of the s-aorist.
897. a. Active participles are dákṣat or dhákṣat, and sákṣat (both RV.).
b. If ṛñjase (above, 894 d) is to be reckoned as an s-aorist form, ṛñjasāná is an s-aorist
participle; and of a kindred character, apparently, are arçasāná, óhasāna, jrayasāná, dhiyasāná,
mandasāná, yamasāná, rabhasāná, vṛdhasāná, sahasāná, çavasāná, all in RV.; with namasāná,
bhiyásāna, in AV. In RV. occurs also once dhī́ṣamāṇa, apparently an a-form of an s-aorist of
√dhī.
5. The iṣ-aorist.
898. The tense-stem of this aorist adds the general tense-sign स् s by help of a prefixed
auxiliary vowel इ i, making इष् iṣ, to the root, which is usually strengthened, and which has the
augment.
899. The rules as to the strengthening of the root are as follows:
a. A final vowel has vṛddhi in the active, and guṇa in the middle: thus, अपािवष् apāviṣ and
अपिवष् apaviṣ from √पू pū cleanse; अतािरष् atāriṣ, act., from √तृ tṛ pass; अशियष् açayiṣ, mid., from
√शी çī lie.
b. A medial vowel has guṇa, if capable of it, in both voices: thus, अलेिशष् aleçiṣ, act. and
mid., from √िल liç tear; अरोिचष् arociṣ, from √च् ruc shine; अवषष् avarṣiṣ from √वृष् vṛṣ rain; but
अजीिवष् ajīviṣ from √जीव् jīv live.
c. Medial अ a is sometimes lengthened in the active; but it more usually remains unchanged
in both voices.
d. The roots in the older language which show the lengthening are kan, tan, ran, stan,
svan, nan, vraj, sad, mad, car, tsar, svar, jval, das, tras. From ran, san, kram, vad, rakṣ, and
sah occur forms of both kinds. From √math or manth are made the two stems mathiṣ and
manthiṣ.

900. a. Of exceptions may be noted: √mṛj has (as elsewhere: 627) vṛddhi instead of guṇa:
thus, amārjiṣam; √stṛ has astarīs, and √çṛ has açarīt (also açarāit in AV.), with guṇa in active.
b. The root grabh or grah has (as in future etc., below, 936 e, 956) long ī instead of i
before the sibilant: thus, agrabhīṣma, agrahīṣṭa, agrabhīṣata. The roots in changeable ṛ (so-
called roots in ṝ: 242), and √vṛ are said by the grammarians to do the same optionally; but no
forms with long ī from such roots have been found quotable. A Sūtra (PGS.) has once anayīṣṭa
from √nī (doubtless a false reading).
901. The endings are as in the preceding formation (उस् us and अत ata in 3d pl.). But in 2d
and 3d sing., the combinations iṣ-s and iṣ-t are from the earliest period of the language
contracted into ईस् īs and ईत् īt.
a. The 2d pl. mid. should end always in iḍhvam (or iḍḍhvam, from iṣ-dhvam: 226); and this
is in fact the form in the only examples quotable, namely ajaniḍhvam, artiḍhvam, āindhiḍhvam,
vepiḍhvam; as to the rules of the native grammarians respecting the matter, see 226 c.
902. As examples of the inflection of the iṣ-aorist may be taken the roots पू pū cleanse, and
बुध् budh wake. Thus:
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
अपािवषम्
ápāviṣam
अपािव
ápāviṣva
अपािव
ápāviṣma
अपिविष
ápaviṣi
अपिविह
ápaviṣvahi
अपिविह
ápaviṣmahi
2
अपावीस्
ápāvīs
अपािवम्
ápāviṣṭam
अपािव
ápāviṣṭa
अपिवास्
ápaviṣṭhās
अपिवषाथाम्
ápaviṣāthām
अपिववम्
ápaviḍhvam
3
अपावीत्
ápāvīt
अपािवाम्
ápāviṣṭām
अपािवषुस्
ápāviṣus
अपिव
ápaviṣṭa
अपिवषाताम्
ápaviṣātām
अपिवषत
ápaviṣata
1
अबोिधषम्
ábodhiṣam
अबोिध
ábodhiṣva
अबोिध
ábodhiṣma
अबोिधिष
ábodhiṣi
अबोिधिह
ábodhiṣvahi
अबोिधिह
ábodhiṣmahi
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
903. The number of roots from which forms of this aorist have been noted in the older
language is nearly a hundred and fifty (in RV., about eighty; in AV., more than thirty, of which
a dozen are additional to those in RV.) ; the later texts add less than twenty. Among these are
no roots in ā; but otherwise they are of every variety of form (rarest in final i and ī). Active
and middle persons are freely made, but sparingly from the same root; only about fifteen

roots have both active and middle forms in the older language, and of these a part only
exceptionally in the one voice or the other.
a. No rale appears to govern the choice of usage between the iṣ- and the s-aorist; and in no
small number of cases the same root shows forms of both classes.
904. Irregularities are to be noticed as follows:
a. The contracted forms akramīm, agrabhīm, and avadhīm (with augmentless vádhīm) are
found in 1st sing. act.
b. For áçarīt occurs in AV. áçarāit; also (in a part of the manuscripts) çarāis for çarīs;
agrahāiṣam is found in AB. (also the monstrous form ajagrabhāiṣam: see 801 i). Ajayit, with
short i in the ending, occurs in TS.
c. AV. has once nudiṣṭhās, without guṇa.
d. The forms atārima (RV.), avādiran (AV.), and bādhithās (TA.), though they lack the
sibilant, are perhaps to be referred to this aorist: compare avitá, 908. A few similar cases occur
in the epics, and are of like doubtful character: thus, jānithās, mādithās, vartithās, çan̄kithās,
and (the causative: 1048) aghātayithās. Agṛhītām and gṛhīthās and gṛhīta, if not false readings
for gṛhṇī-, are probably irregular present-formations.
Modes of the iṣ-aorist.
905. As usual, augmentless indicative forms of this aorist are more common than proper
subjunctives. Examples, of all the persons found to occur (and including all the accented
words), are, in the active: çáṅsiṣam, vádhīm; máthīs, vádhīs, yā́vīs, sā́vīs; ávīt, jū́rvīt, máthīt,
vádhīt, veçīt; mardhiṣṭam, doṣiṣṭam, hiṅsiṣṭam; aviṣṭām, jániṣṭām, bādhiṣṭām; çramiṣma, vādiṣma;
vadhiṣṭa and vadhiṣṭana, mathiṣṭana, hiṅsiṣṭa; hvāriṣus, grahīṣus; — in the middle: rādhiṣi;
jániṣṭhās, marṣiṣṭhās, vyathiṣṭhās; krámiṣṭa, jániṣṭa, paviṣṭa, práthiṣṭa, mándiṣṭa; vyathiṣmahi.
The accent is on the root-syllable (tāriṣús, AV. once, is doubtless an error).
906. a. Of subjunctive forms with primary endings occur only the 1st sing. act. daviṣāṇi, and
the 1st pl. mid. (with unstrengthened e) yāciṣāmahe and saniṣāmahe.
b. Forms with secondary endings are almost limited to 2d and 3d sing. act. There are
found: aviṣas, kā́niṣas, tāriṣas, rakṣiṣas, vádhiṣas; vā́diṣas, véṣiṣas, çaṅsiṣas; kā́riṣat, jambhiṣat,
jóṣiṣat, takṣiṣat, tāriṣat, níndiṣat, pā́riṣat, bódhiṣat, márdhiṣat, yāciṣat, yodhiṣat, rakṣiṣat,
vaniṣat, vyathiṣat, çaṅsiṣat, saniṣat, sāviṣat. They are made, it will be noticed, with entire
regularity, by adding a to the tense-stem in iṣ before the endings. The only other persons found
to occur are the 3d pl. act. saniṣan and mid. sániṣanta (and TS. has vaniṣanta,

for the problematic vanuṣanta of RV.), which are also regular. Bhaviṣāt (AB. once) is a solitary
example of a form with double mode-sign; cániṣṭhat (RV.; SV. instead jániṣṭhat) seems
hopelessly corrupt. The radical syllable always has the accent, and its vowel usually accords
with that of the indicative: but we have san- in the subjunctive against asāniṣam (as to cay- and
ran-, see below, 908).
907. The middle optative of this aorist also forms a part of the accepted "precative" of the
later language (923, 925 b). It is very rare at all periods, being made in RV. from only five
roots, and in AV. from two of the same and from three additional ones (six of the eight have
other iṣ-forms); and the remaining texts add, so far as noticed, only four other roots. All the
forms found to occur are as follows: janiṣīya, indhiṣīya, edhiṣīyá, ruciṣīya and rociṣīya, gmiṣīya;
modiṣīṣṭhās; janiṣīṣṭa; vaniṣīṣṭa; sahiṣīvahi; idhiṣīmahi, edhiṣīmáhi, janiṣīmahi, tāriṣīmahi,
mandiṣīmahi, vandiṣīmáhi, vardhiṣīmáhi, sahiṣīmahi and sāhiṣīmáhi. The accent is on the ending,
and this would lead us to expect a weak form of root throughout; but the usage in this respect
appears to be various, and the cases are too few to allow of setting up any rule. The forms
janiṣeyam and -ya, from a secondary a-stem, occur in K.
908. Of imperative forms, we have from √av a series: namely, aviḍḍhí, aviṣṭu, aviṣṭám, avitá
(if this, as seems probable, stands anomalously for aviṣṭá) and aviṣṭána; two of these are of
unmistakably imperative form. Other forms occur only in 2d du. and 2d pl., and are accordingly
such as might also be subjunctives used imperatively (which is further made probable for two of
them by their accentuation on the root-syllable): they are kramiṣṭam, gamiṣṭam, caniṣṭám,
cayiṣṭam (against acāyiṣam) , tā́riṣṭam, yodhiṣṭam, vadhiṣṭam, çnathiṣṭam; ráṇiṣṭana (against
arāṇiṣus), çnathiṣṭana.
909. No words having a participial ending after iṣ are found anywhere to occur.
910. This is the only aorist of which forms are made in the secondary and denominative
conjugations: see below, 1035, 1048, 1068.
6. The siṣ-aorist.
911. According to the grammarians, this aorist is made from roots in आ ā (including िम mi
fix, िम mi (or mī) damage and ली Iī cling, which substitute forms in ā), and from नम् nam bow,
यम् yam reach, and रम् ram be content, and is used only in the active ; the corresponding
middle being of the s-form (878 ff.). Its inflection is precisely like that of the iṣ-aorist; it is
unnecessary, then, to give more than

its first persons, which we may form from the roots या yā go and नम् nam low. Thus:
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
अयािसषम्
áyāsiṣam
अयािस
áyāsiṣva
अयािस
áyāsiṣma
अनंिसषम्
ánaṁsiṣam
अनंिस
ánaṁsiṣva
अनंिस
ánaṁsiṣma
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
912. The siṣ-aorist is properly only a sub-form of the iṣ-aorist, having the tense-sign and
endings of the latter added to a form of root increased by an added s. It is of extreme rarity in
the older language, being made in RV. only from the roots gā sing and yā go, and in AV. only
from hā leave, and doubtless also from pyā fill up and van win (see below, 914 b); the
remaining older texts add jñā know (B.), jyā overpower, dhyā think (ÇB. once: the edition reads
-dhā-), and ram be content (SV.: a bad variant for RY. rāsīya); other Brāhmaṇa forms which
might be also of the s-aorist are adrāsīt, avāsīt, and ahvāsīt; and bhukciṣīya (PB. S.) must be
regarded as an anomalous formation from √bhuj, unless we prefer to admit a secondary root
bhukṣ, like bhakṣ from bhaj. In the later language have been found quotable from other roots
only glāsīs, adhmāsīt, anaṁsīt, apāsīt, mlāsīs, and amnāsiṣus.
a. The participle hā́samāna and causative hāsayanti (RV.) show that hās had assumed, even
at a very early period, the value of a secondary root beside hā for other forms than the aorist.
913. The whole series of older indicative forms (omitting, as doubtful, the 2d and 3d sing.)
is as follows: agāsiṣam, ajñāsiṣam, ayāsiṣam, adhyāsiṣam; ajyāsiṣṭām, ayāsiṣṭām; ajñāsiṣma;
ajñāsiṣṭa, áyāsiṣṭa; agāsiṣus, ayāsiṣus (ākṣiṣus is from √akṣ attain).
a. Forms without augment are these: jñāsiṣam, raṁsiṣam, hāsiṣam; hāsiṣṭam; hāsiṣṭām;
hāsiṣṭa; hāsiṣus, gāsiṣus, jñāsiṣus. The accent would doubtless be upon the root-syllable.
914. a. Of proper subjunctives are found two, gāsiṣat and yāsiṣat (both RV.).
b. Optatives are not less rare: namely, yāsisīṣṭhas and pyāsiṣīmahi (for which the AV.
manuscripts read pyāçiṣīmahi, altered in the edition to pyāyiṣ-); and doubtless vaṅçiṣīya (AV.,
twice) is to be corrected to vaṅsiṣīya, and belongs here. As to bhukṣiṣīya, see above, 912.
c. The accent of yāsiṣṭám (like aviṣṭám, 908) shows it to be a true imperative form; and
yāsīṣṭa (RV., once) is doubtless the same, with anomalous ī for i.
915. Middle forms of this aorist, it will be noticed, occur from the optative only; but,
considering the great rarity of the whole formation, we are hardly justified in concluding that in
the ancient language the middle persons in -siṣi, -siṣṭhās, etc., were not allowable, like those in
-iṣi, -iṣṭhās, and the others of the iṣ-aorist.

7. The sa-aorist.
916. In the later language, the roots allowed to form this aorist end in  ç, ष् ṣ, or  h —
all of them sounds which in combination with the tense-sign make  kṣ; and they have इ i, उ u,
or ऋ ṛ as radical vowel.
a. They are as follows: diç, riç, liç, viç, kliç, kruç, ruç, mṛç, spṛç; tviṣ, dviṣ, çliṣ, viṣ, kṛṣ; dih,
mih, lih, guh, duh, ruh, tṛh, vṛh, stṛh; from about half of them sa-forms, earlier or later, are
quotable. Some of them may, or with certain meanings must, take aorists of other forms. And a
few are allowed to drop both tense-sign and union-vowel a in certain persons of the middle:
that is, they may make instead forms of the root-aorist.
917. As the tense-stem ends in अ a, the inflection is in the main like that of an imperfect of
the second general conjugation. But (according to the grammarians: the forms unfortunately
have not been found quotable) the 1st sing. mid. ends in इ i instead of ए e, and the 2d and 3d
du. mid. in आथाम् āthām and आताम् ātām, as in imperfects of the other conjugation. Both active
and middle inflection is admitted. The root is throughout unstrengthened.
918. As example of inflection we may take the root िद diç point. Thus:
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
अिदम्
ádikṣam
अिदाव
ádikṣāva
अिदाम
ádikṣāma
अिदि
ádikṣi
अिदाविह
ádikṣāvahi
अिदामिह
ádikṣāmahi
2
अिदस्
ádikṣas
अिदतम्
ádikṣatam
अिदत
ádikṣata
अिदाथास्
ádikṣāthās
अिदाथाम्
ádikṣāthām
अिदम्
ádikṣādhvam
3
अिदित्
ádikṣat
अिदताम्
ádikṣatām
अिदन्
ádikṣan
अिदत
ádikṣata
अिदाताम्
ádikṣātām
अिद
ádikṣanta
919. In the earlier language, the forms of the sa-aorist are hardly more than sporadic. They
are made in RV. from seven roots; in AV., from two of these and from two others; and the
remaining texts add ten more, making nineteen in all (the later language makes no additions to
this number). As later, all have i or u or ṛ as root-vowel, and a final consonant which combines
with s to kṣ; but there are in the list also two

ending in j, namely mṛj and vṛj. All the examples noted are given below.
a. So far as the middle forms are concerned, this aorist would be fully explained as a
transfer of certain s-aorists to an a-inflection. The marked difference in the strength of radical
vowel in the active, however, stands in the way of the successful application of such an
explanation to the active forms.
920. a. In the indicative, we find, in the active: avṛkṣam; adrukṣas, adhukṣas, arukṣas,
akrukṣas, aspṛkṣas (and MBh. adds amṛkṣas) ; adikṣat, amikṣat, alikṣat, avikṣat, ákrukṣat,
aghukṣat, adukṣat and ádhukṣat, árukṣat, avṛkṣat, akṛkṣat, ámṛkṣat, áspṛkṣat; aghukṣatām;
arukṣāma, amṛkṣāma, avṛkṣāma; ádhukṣan, apikṣan (√piṣ), arukṣan, aspṛkṣan; — in the middle,
only akṛkṣathās (√kṛṣ), ádhukṣata, and amṛkṣanta (and MBh. adds amṛkṣata?).
b. Forms without augment (no true subjunctives occur) are, in the active: dṛkṣam, mṛkṣam;
dukṣas, rukṣas, mṛkṣas; dvikṣat; mṛkṣata; dhukṣán and dukṣán; — in the middle, dvikṣata,
dukṣata and dhúkṣata, dhukṣánta.
c. There are no optative forms.
d. Imperative are: in the active, mṛkṣatam; in the middle, dhukṣásva.
e. The few accented forms without augment which occur have the tone on the tense-sign sá,
in analogy with the a-aorist (2) and the imperfect of the á-class: a single exception is dhúkṣata,
which probably needs emendation to dhukṣáta.
f. The aspiration of initial d and g, after loss of the aspirated quality of the root-final (155),
is seen in forms from the roots duh and guh, but not from druh (only a single case, AB.); RV.,
however, has also adukṣat and dukṣas, dukṣán, dukṣata.
Precative.
921. As the so-called precative is allowed by the grammarians to be made in the later
language from every root, and in an independent way, without reference to the mode of
formation of the aorist from the same root, it is desirable to put together here a brief statement
of the rules given for it.
922. The precative active is made by adding the active precative endings (above, 568)
directly to the root. But:
a. Of final root-vowels (as before the passive-sign yá: 770), i and u are lengthened; ṛ is
usually changed to ri, but to īr and ūr in those roots which elsewhere show ir- and ur- forms
(so-called ṝ-roots: 242), and to ar in ṛ and smṛ; ā is changed to e in the roots dā, dhā, sthā, pā
drink, gā sing, and a few others, in part optionally.

b. The root in general assumes its weakest form: a penultimate nasal is lost, as in
badhyāsam from √bandh; the roots which are abbreviated in the weak persons of the perfect
(794) have the same abbreviation here, as in ucyāsam, ijyāsam, vidhyāsam, supyāsam, gṛhyāsam;
√çās forms çiṣyāsam (compare 639, 854 c): and so on.
c. It has been pointed out above (837) that the active precative is an optative of the root-
aorist, with a problematic insertion of a sibilant between mode-sign and ending.
923. a. The precative middle is made by adding the middle precative endings (above, 568)
to the root increased by स् s or इष् iṣ — that is, to the tense-stem of an s-aorist or of an iṣ-
aorist (but without augment).
b. The root is strengthened according to the rules that apply in forming the middle-stem of
the s and of the iṣ-aorists respectively: in general, namely, a final vowel is gunated in both
formations; but a medial vowel, only before इष् iṣ.
c. As was pointed out above (567) the middle precative is really the optative of certain
aorists, with the insertion of a sibilant between mode-sign and ending only (so far as
authenticated by use) in the 2d and 3d singular. In the older language, such forms are oftenest
made from the s-aorist (895) and the iṣ-aorist (907); but also from the root-aorist (837 b), the
a-aorist (850 a), the reduplicated aorist (870), and the siṣ-aorist (914 b); and even from the
perfect (812 b).
924. As example of inflection, we may take the root भू bhū be, which is said (no middle
aorist or precative from it is quotable) to form its middle on the iṣ-stem. Thus:
active.
s.
d.
p.
1
भूयासम्
bhūyā́sam
भूया
bhūyā́sva
भूया
bhūyā́sma
2
भूयास्
bhūyā́s
भूयाम्
bhūyā́stam
भूया
bhūyā́sta
3
भूयात्
bhūyā́t
भूयााम्
bhūyā́stām
भूयासुस्
bhūyā́sus

middle.
s.
d.
p.
1
भिवषीय
bhaviṣīyá
भिवषीविह
bhaviṣīváhi
भिवषीमिह
bhaviṣīmáhi
2
भिवषीास्
bhaviṣīṣṭhā́s
भिवषीयााम्
bhaviṣīyā́sthām
भिवषीवम्
bhaviṣīḍhvám
3
भिवषी
bhaviṣīṣṭá
भिवषीयााम्
bhaviṣīyā́stām
भिवषीरन्
bhaviṣīrán
a. The forms given by the grammarians as 2d and 3d dual are of very questionable value, as
regards the place assigned to the sibilant. Those persons, and the 2d pl., have never been met
with in use. For the question respecting the ending of the 2d pl., as dhvam or ḍhvam, see 226
c.
925. a. The precative active is a form of very rare occurrence in the classical language. In
each of the texts already more than once referred to (Manu, Nala, Bhagavad-Gītā, Çakuntalā,
Hitopadeça) it occurs once and no more, and not half-a-dozen forms have been found quotable
from the epics. As to its value, see 573 c.
b. The precative middle is virtually unknown in the whole later literature, not a single
occurrence of it having been brought to light. The BhP. has once rīriṣīṣṭa, which is also a RV.
form, belonging probably to the reduplicated aorist: see 870.
Uses of the Aorist.
926. The uses of the aorist mode-forms (as has been already pointed out: 582) appear to
accord with those of the mode-forms of the present-system. The predilection of the earlier
language, continued sparingly in the later, for the augmentless forms in prohibitive expression
after mā́ was sufficiently stated and illustrated above (579).
a. The tense-value of the aorist indicative has also been more than once referred to, and
calls only for somewhat more of detail and for illustration here.
927. The aorist of the later language is simply a preterit, equivalent to the imperfect and
perfect, and frequently coördinated with them.
a. Thus, tataḥ sa gardabhaṁ laguḍena tāḍayāmāsa; tenā ’sāu pañcatvam agamat  (H.)
thereupon he beat the donkey with a stick; and hereof the latter died ; tataḥ sā vidarbhān
agamat punaḥ; tāṁ tu bandhujanaḥ samapūjayat (MBh.) thereupon she went back to Vidarbha;
and her kindred paid her reverence; prītimān abhūt, uvāca

cāi ’nam (MBh.) he was filled with affection, and said to him ; tam adahat kāṣṭhāiḥ so ‘bhūd
divyavapus tadā (R.) he burned him with wood, and he became then a heavenly form .
928. The aorist of the older language has the value of a proper "perfect": that is, it signifies
something past which is viewed as completed with reference to the present; and it requires
accordingly to be rendered by our tense made with the auxiliary have. In general, it indicates
what has just taken place; and oftenest something which the speaker has experienced.
a. Examples from the Veda are: párī ’mé gā́m aneṣata páry agním ahṛṣata, devéṣv akrata
çrávaḥ ká imā́n ā́ dadharṣati (RV.) these here have led about a cow, they have carried around
the fire, they have done honor to the gods — who shall venture anything against them? yám
āíchāma mánasā sò ‘yám ā́ ’gāt (RV.) he whom we (formerly, impf.) sought with our mind has
(now, aor.) come; yéné ’ndro havíṣā kṛtvy ábhavad dyumny ùttamáḥ, idáṁ tád akri devā
asapatnáḥ kílā ’bhuvam (RV.) that libation by which Indra, making it, became  (impf.) of highest
glory, I have now made, ye gods; I have become free from enemies.
b. Examples from the Brāhmaṇa language are: sā́ hā ’smiñ jyóg uvāsa... táto ha gandharvā́ḥ
sám ūdire: jyóg vā́ iyám urváçī manuṣyèṣv avātsīt (ÇB.) she lived with him a long time. Then
the Gandharvas said to one another, "this Urvaçī, forsooth, hath dwelt a long time among
mortals"; tasya ha dantāḥ pedire: taṁ ho ’vāca: apatsata vā asya dantāḥ (AB.) his teeth fell out.
He said to him: "his teeth truly have fallen out"; índrasya vṛtráṁ jaghnúṣa indriyáṁ vīryàm
pṛthivī́m ánu vy ā̀rchat tád óṣadhayo vīrúdho ‘bhavan sá prajapā́tim úpā ’dhāvad vṛtrám me
jaghnúṣa indriyáṁ vīryàm pṛthivī́m ánu vy ā̀rat tád óṣadhayo vīrúdho ‘bhūvann íti (TS.) of Indra,
when he had slain Vritra, the force and might went away into the earth, and became the herbs
and plants; he ran to Prajāpati, saying: "my force and might, after slaying Vritra, have gone
away into the earth, and have become the herbs and plants"; svayám enam abhyudétya brūyād
vrā́tya kvā̀ ’vātsīḥ (AV., in prose passage) going up to him in person, let him say: "Vrātya,
where hast thou abode"? yád idā́nīṁ dvāú vivádamānāv eyā́tām ahám adarçam ahám açrāuṣam
íti yá evá brūyā́d ahám adarçam íti tásmā evá çráddadhyāma (ÇB.) if now two should come
disputing with one another, [the one] saying "I have seen", [the other] "I have heard", we
should believe the one who said "I have seen".
929. a. This distinction of the aorist from the imperfect and perfect as tenses of narration is
very common in the Brāhmaṇalanguage (including the older Upanishads and the Sūtras), and is
closely observed; violation of it is very rare, and is to be regarded as either due to corruption
of text or indicative of a late origin.
b. In the Vedic hymns, the same distinction is prevalent, but is both less clear and less
strictly maintained; many passages would admit an

interpretation implying either sense; and evident aorist-forms are sometimes used narratively,
while imperfect-forms are also occasionally employed in the aorist sense.
930. The boundary between what has just been and what is is an evanescent one, and is
sometimes overstepped, so that an aorist appears where a present might stand, or was even
rather to be expected. Thus: svāsasthe bhavatam indave na iti somo vāi rāje ’nduḥ somāyāi ’vāi
’ne etad rājña āsade ‘cīkḷpat (AB. i. 29. 7) "be ye comfortable seats for our Indu", he says; Indu
is king Soma; by this means he has made them (instead of makes them) suitable for king Soma
to sit upon; vāruṇī́r ā́po yád adbhír abhiṣiñcáti váruṇam evāí ’nam akar  (MS. iv. 3. 10) the
waters are Varuna's; in that he bepours him with waters, he has made him Varuna; pañcábhir
vyā́ghārayati pā́n̄kto yajñó yā́vān evá yajñás tám ā́labdhā́ ’tho yā́vān evá yajñás tásmād rákṣāṅsy
ápahanti (MS. iii. 2. 6) he smears with five; fivefold is the offering; as great as is the offering,
of it he has [thereby] taken hold; then, as great as is the offering, from it he smites away the
demons. This idiom is met with in all the Brāhmaṇas; but it is especially frequent in the MS.
CHAPTER XII.
THE FUTURE-SYSTEMS.
931. The verb has two futures, of very different age and character. The one has for tense-
sign a sibilant followed by य ya, and is an inheritance from the time of Indo-European unity.
The other is a periphrastic formation, made by appending an auxiliary verb to a derivative noun
of agency, and it is a recent addition to the verb-system; its beginnings only are met with in
the earliest language. The former may be called the s-future (or the old future, or simply the
future); the latter may be distinguished as the periphrastic future.

I. The s-future.
932. The tense-sign of this future is the syllable  syá, added to the root either directly or
by an auxiliary vowel इ i (in the latter case becoming इ iṣyá). The root has the guṇa-
strengthening. Thus, from √दा dā give is formed the future tense-stem दा dāsyá; from √इ i go,
the stem ए eṣyá; from √ duh milk, the stem धो dhokṣyá; from √भू bhū be, the stem भिव
bhaviṣyá; from √ऋध् ṛdh thrive, the stem अध ardhiṣyá; and so on.
a. But from √jīv live the stem is jīviṣyá, from √ukṣ sprinkle it is ukṣiṣyá, and so on (240).
b. There are hardly any Vedic cases of resolution of the tense-sign sya into sia; RV. has
kṣeṣiántas once.
933. This tense-stem is then inflected precisely like a present-stem ending in अ a (second
general conjugation: 733 a). We may take as models of inflection the future of √दा dā give, and
that of √ kṛ make. Thus:
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
दाािम
dāsyā́mi
दाावस्
dāsyā́vas
दाामस्
dāsyā́mas
दाे
dāsyé
दाावहे
dāsyā́vahe
दाामहे
dāsyā́mahe
2
दािस
dāsyási
दाथस्
dāsyáthas
दाथ
dāsyátha
दासे
dāsyáse
दाेथे
dāsyéthe
दाे
dāsyádhve
3
दाित
dāsyáti
दातस्
dāsyátas
दाि
dāsyánti
दाते
dāsyáte
दाेते
dāsyéte
दाे
dāsyánte
1
किरािम
kariṣyā́mi
किरावस्
kariṣyā́vas
किरामस्
kariṣyā́mas
किरे
kariṣyé
किरावहे
kariṣyā́vahe
किरामहे
kariṣyā́mahe
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
a. In the epics are found occasional cases of 1st du. and pl. in va and ma: e. g. raṁsyāva
(R.), bhakṣayiṣyāva (causative: MBh.); eṣyāma (MBh.), vatsyāma (R.).
934. With regard to the use or non-use of the auxiliary vowel i before the sibilant, there is
a degree of general accordance between this tense and the other future and the desiderative;
but it is by no means absolute, nor are any definite rules to be laid down with regard to it
(and so much the less, because of the infrequency of the two latter formations in actual use):
between this and the aorist (s-

aorist on the one side, or iṣ-aorist on the other), any correspondence is still less traceable.
Practically, it is necessary to learn, as a matter of usage, how any given root makes these
various parts of its conjugational system.
935. Below is added a statement of the usage, as regards the auxiliary vowel, of all the
roots found quotable — for the most part, in the form of a specification of those which add the
tense-sign directly to the root; in brackets are further mentioned the other roots which
according to the grammarians also refuse the auxiliary vowel.
a. Of roots ending in vowels, the great majority (excepting those in ṛ) take no i. Thus, all in
ā (numerous, and unnecessary to specify: but compare c below); those in i, as kṣi possess, ci
gather, ci note, mi, si or sā bind (siṣya) , hi; from i, kṣi destroy, and ji occur forms of both
classes; çri [and çvi] has i; — those in ī, as krī, bhī, mī, vlī; but çī lie and nī have both forms
[and ḍī takes i]; — those in u, as cyu, dru, plu, çru, hu ; but su press out and stu have both
forms [and kṣu, kṣṇu, nu, yu, ru, snu  take i]; — of those in ū, dhū and bhū take i; sū has both
forms. But all in ṛ (numerous, and unnecessary to specify) take i [those in changeable ṛ, for so-
called ṝ-roots (242), are said by the grammarians to take either i or ī; no ī-forms, however, are
quotable].
b. Of roots ending in mutes, about half add the tense-sign directly. Thus, of roots ending in
gutturals, çak; — in palatals: in c, pac, muc, ric, vac, vic, vraçc, sic  (but yāc takes i); in ch,
prach; in j, bhañj, mṛj (mārkṣya and mrakṣya) , yaj, bhuj, yuj, vṛj, sṛj [also bhrajj, rañj, sañj,
svañj, nij, ruj], while tyaj, bhaj, and majj (man̄kṣya and majjiṣya) have both forms, and vij
(vijiṣya and vejiṣya) and vraj take i; — in dentals: in t, kṛt cut and vṛt [also cṛt and nṛt] make
both forms; in d, ad, pad, çad  fall, skand, syand, chid, bhid, vid  find, nud [also had, khid, svid,
kṣud, tud]; while sad (satsya and sīdiṣya) and vid know make both forms [also chṛd and tṛd],
and vad has i; in dh, vyadh (vetsya), rādh, sidh succeed, budh, yudh, rudh, vṛdh. [also sādh,
krudh, kṣudh, çudh], and bandh and sidh repel have both forms; in n, tan, while man and han
have both forms; — in labials: in p, āp, kṣip, gup, tṛp, sṛp  (srapsya and sarpsya) [also çap, lip,
lup], while tap, vap, svap, dṛp, and kḷp have both forms; in bh, yabh and rabh, labh having
both forms; in m, ram, while kram, kṣam, nam, and yam make both forms.
c. Of the roots reckoned by the grammarians as ending in semivowels (761 d–g) all take i.
And vā or vi weave, vyā or vī envelop, and hvā or hū call take a y-form, as in their present-
system, to which then i is added: thus, vayiṣya, vyayiṣya, hvayiṣya (but also hvāsya).
d. Of roots ending in spirants, the minority (about a third) are without the auxiliary vowel.
They are: roots in ç, diç, viç, dṛç (drakṣya), spṛç (sprakṣya) [also daṅç, riç, liç, kruç, mṛç], while
naç be lost has both forms (nan̄kṣya and naçiṣya); in ṣ, piṣ, viṣ, çiṣ [also

tviṣ, dviṣ, çliṣ, tuṣ, duṣ, puṣ, çuṣ], while kṛṣ has both forms (krakṣya and karṣiṣya); — in s, vas
shine, vas clothe [also ghas], while vas dwell has both forms; — in h, mih, duh, druh [also nah,
dih, lih], while dah, vah, sah, and ruh have both forms.
e. In the older language, a majority (about five ninths) of simple roots add the sya without
auxiliary i; of the futures occurring in the later language only, nearly three quarters have the i,
this being generally taken by any root of late origin and derivative character — as it is also
uniformly taken in secondary conjugation (1019, 1036, 1050, 1068).
936. As the root is strengthened to form the stem of this future, so, of a root that has a
stronger and a weaker form, the stronger form is used: thus, from √bandh or badh bind,
bhantsya or bandhiṣya.
a. By an irregular strengthening, nan̄kṣya (beside naçiṣya) is made from √naç be lost, and
man̄kṣya (beside majjiṣya) from √majj sink.
b. But a few roots make future-stems in the later language without strengthening: thus,
likhiṣya, miliṣya (also TS.), vijiṣya (also vejiṣya), siṣya (√sā or si), sūṣya (939 b), sphuṭiṣya; and
√vyadh makes vetsya from the weaker form vidh.
c. The ÇB. has once the monstrous form açnuviṣyāmahe, made upon the present-stem açnu
(697) of √aç attain. And the later language makes sīdiṣya and jahiṣya from the present-stems of
√sad and √hā. Compare further hvayiṣya etc., 935 c. Also khyāyiṣya from √khyā (beside
khyāsya) appears to be of similar character.
d. A number of roots with medial ṛ strengthen it to ra (241): thus, krakṣya, trapaya,
drapaya, drakṣya, mrakṣya (beside mārkṣya) , sprakṣya, srakṣya, srapsya (beside sarpsya), and
mradiṣya (beside mardiṣya); and √kḷp forms klapsya (beside kalpiṣya).
e. The root grah (also its doublet glah) takes ī instead of i, as it does also in the aorist and
elsewhere.
937. This future is comparatively rare in the oldest language — in part, apparently, because
the uses of a future are to a large extent answered by subjunctive forms — but becomes more
and more common later. Thus, the RV. has only seventeen occurrences of personal forms, from
nine different roots (with participles from six additional roots); the AV. has fifty occurrences,
from twenty-five roots (with participles from seven more); but the TS. has occurrences (personal
forms and participles together) from over sixty roots; and forms from more than a hundred and
fifty roots are quotable from the older texts.
Modes of the s-future.
938. Mode-forms of the future are of the utmost rarity. The only example in the older
language is kariṣyā́s, 2d sing. subj. act., occurring once (or twice) in RV. (AB. has once
notsyāvahāi, and GB. has eṣyāmahāi, taṅsyāmahāi, sthāsyāmahāi, but they are doubtless false
read-

ings for -he. Two or three optative forms are found in the epics: thus, dhakṣyet and maṅsyeran
(MBh.), and drakṣyeta (R.); also an imperative patsyantu (Har.). And several 2d pl. mid. in
dhvam are quotable from the epics: thus, vetsyadhvam, saviṣyadhvam, and (the causative)
kālayiṣyadhvam (PB.) and jīvayiṣyadhvam (MBh.: and one text has mokṣyadhvam at i. 133. 13,
where the other reads mokṣayadhvam), and bhaviṣyadhvam (MBh. R.): it is a matter of question
whether these are to be accounted a real imperative formation, or an epic substitution of
secondary for primary endings (compare 542 a).
Participles of the s-future.
939. Participles are made from the future-stem precisely as from a present-stem in अ a:
namely, by adding in the active the ending ् nt, in the middle the ending मान māna; the accent
remains upon the stem. Thus, from the verbs instanced above, दा् dāsyánt and दामान
dāsyámāna, किर् kariṣyánt and किरमाण kariṣyámāṇa.
a. According to the grammarians, the feminine of the active participle is made either in ántī
or in atī́; but only the former has been noted as occurring in the older language, and the latter
is everywhere extremely rare: see above, 449 e,f.
b. In RV. occurs once sū́ṣyantī, from √sū, with anomalous accentuation.
Preterit of the s-future: Conditional.
940. From the future-stem is made an augment-preterit, by prefixing the augment and
adding the secondary endings, in precisely the same manner as an imperfect from a present-
stem in अ a. This preterit is called the conditional.
a. It stands related to the future, in form and meaning, as the French conditional aurais to
the future aurai, or as the English would have to will have — nearly as the German würde
haben to werde haben.
b. Thus, from the roots already instanced:
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
अदाम्
ádāsyam
अदााव
ádāsyāva
अदााम
ádāsyāma
अदाे
ádāsye
अदााविह
ádāsyāvahi
अदाामिह
ádāsyāmahi

2 अदास्
ádāsyas
अदातम्
ádāsyatam
अदात
ádāsyata
अदाथास्
ádāsyathās
अदाेथाम्
ádāsyethām
अदाम्
ádāsyadhvam
3 अदात्
ádāsyat
अदाताम्
ádāsyatām
अदान्
ádāsyan
अदात
ádāsyata
अदाेताम्
ádāsyetām
अदा
ádāsyanta
1 अकिरम्
ákariṣyam
अकिराव
ákariṣyāva
अकिराम
ákariṣyāma
अकिरे
ákariṣye
अकिराविह
ákariṣyāvahi
अकिरामिह
ákariṣyāmahi
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
941. The conditional is the rarest of all the forms of the Sanskrit verb. The RV. has but a
single example, ábhariṣyat was going to carry off , and none of the Vedic texts furnishes
another. In the Brāhmaṇas it is hardly more common — except in ÇB., where it is met with
more than fifty times. Nor does it, like the future, become more frequent later: not an example
occurs in Nala, Bhagavad-Gītā, or Hitopadeça; only one in Manu; and two in Çakuntalā. In the
whole MBh. (Holtzmann) it is found about twenty-five times, from thirteen roots. The middle
forms are extremely few.
II. The Periphrastic Future.
942. a. This formation contains only a single indicative active tense (or also middle: see
947), without modes, or participle, or preterit.
b. It consists in a derivative nomen agentis, having the value of a future active participle,
and used, either with or without an accompanying auxiliary, in the office of a verbal tense with
future meaning.
943. The noun is formed by the suffix तृ tṛ (or त tar); and this (as in its other than verbal
uses: see 1182) is added to the root either directly or with a preceding auxiliary vowel इ i, the
root itself being strengthened by guṇa, but the accent resting on the suffix: thus, दातृ dātṛ́ from
√दा dā give; कतृ kartṛ́ from √ kṛ make; भिवतृ bhavitṛ́ from √भू bhū be.
a. As regards the presence or absence of the vowel i, the usage is said by the grammarians
to be generally the same as in the s-future from the same root (above, 935). The most
important exception is that the roots in ṛ take no i: thus, kartṛ (against kariṣya); roots han and
gam show the same difference; while vṛt, vṛdh, and syand have i here, though

not in the s-future. The few forms which occur in the older language agree with these
statements.
944. In the third persons, the nom. masc. of the noun, in the three numbers respectively
(373), is used without auxiliary: thus, मिवता bhavitā́ he or she or it will be; मिवतारौ bhavitā́rāu
both will be; मिवतारस् bhavitā́ras they will be. In the other persons, the first and second persons
present of √अस् as be (636) are used as auxiliary; and they are combined, in all numbers, with
the singular nom. masc. of the noun.
a. Thus, from √दा dā give:
active.
s.
d.
p.
1
दाताि
dātā́smi
दातास्
dātā́svas
दातास्
dātā́smas
2
दातािस
dātā́si
दातास्
dātā́sthas
दाता
dātā́stha
3
दाता
dātā́
दातारौ
dātā́rāu
दातारस्
dātā́ras
b. Occasionally, in the epics and later (almost never in the older language), the norm of the
tense as given above is in various respects departed from: thus, by use of the auxiliary in the
3d person also; by its omission in the 1st or 2d person; by inversion of the order of noun and
auxiliary; by interposition of other words between them; by use of a dual or plural nom. with
the auxiliary; and by use of a feminine form of the noun. Examples are: vaktā ’sti (MBh.) he
will speak; nihantā (MBh.) I shall or thou wilt strike down, yoddhā ’ham (R.) I shall fight, ahaṁ
draṣṭā (MBh.) I shall see, kartā ’haṁ te (BhP.) I will do for thee , tvam bhavitā (MBh. Megh.)
thou wilt be; asmi gantā (MBh.) I shall go; pratigrahītā tām asmi (MBh.) I will receive her,
hantā tvam asi (MBh.) thou wilt slay; kartārāu svaḥ (MBh.) we two shall do ; draṣṭry asmi
(MBh.) I (f.) shall see, udbhavitrī (Nāiṣ.) she will increase, gantrī (Y.) she will go. AB. has once
sotā as 2d sing., thou wilt press; JUB. makes the combination çmaçānāni bhavitāras the
cemeteries will be.
c. An optative of the auxiliary appears to be once used, in yoddhā syām I would fight (R. i.
22. 25 Peterson; but the Bombay edition reads yoddhuṁ yāsyāmi).
945. The accent in these combinations, as in all the ordinary cases of collocation of a verb
with a preceding predicate noun or

adjective (592), is on the noun itself; and, unlike all the true verbal forms, the combination
retains its accent everywhere even in an independent clause: thus, tárhi vā́ atināṣṭró bhavitā́smi
(ÇB.) then I shall be out of danger  (where bhaviṣyāmi, if used, would be accentless). Whether
in a dependent clause the auxiliary verb would take an accent (595), and whether, if so, at the
expense of the accent of the noun (as in the case of a preposition compounded with a verb-
form: 1083b), we are without the means of determining.
940. In the Veda, the nomina agentis in tṛ or tar, like various other derivative nouns (271),
but with especial frequency, are used in participial construction, governing the accusative if
they come from roots whose verbal forms do so (1182). Often, also, they are used predicatively,
with or without accompanying copula; yet without any implication of time; they are not the
beginnings, but only the forerunners, of a new tense-formation. Generally, when they have a
participial value, the root-syllable (or a prefix preceding it) has the accent. The tense-use
begins, but rather sparingly, in the Brāhmaṇas (from which about thirty forms are quotable);
and it grows more common later, though the periphrastic future is nowhere nearly so frequent
as the s-future (it is quotable later from about thirty additional roots).
947. a. A few isolated attempts are made in the Brāhmaṇas to form by analogy middle
persons to this future, with endings corresponding after the usual fashion to those of the active
persons. Thus, TS. has once prayoktā́se I will apply (standing related to prayoktāsmi as, for
example, çāse to çāsmi); ÇB. has çayitā́se thou shalt lie (similarly related to çayitāsi); and TB.
has yaṣṭā́smahe we will make offering. But in TA. is found (i. 11) yaṣṭā́he as 1st sing., showing
a phonetic correspondence of a problematic character, not elsewhere met with in the language.
b. On the basis of such tentative formations as these, the native grammarians set up a
complete middle inflection for the periphrastic future, as follows:
s.
d.
p.
1
dātā́he
dātā́svahe
dātā́smahe
2
dātā́se
dātā́sāthe
dātā́dhve
3
dātā́
dātā́rau
dātā́ras
c. Only a single example of such a middle has been brought to light in the later language,
namely (the causative) darçayitāhe (Nāiṣ.).
Uses of the Futures and Conditional.
948. As the s-future is the commoner, so also it is the one more indefinitely used. It
expresses in general what is going to take place at some time to come — but often, as in other
languages, adding on the one hand an implication of will or intention, or on the other hand that
of promise or threatening.

a. A few examples are: varṣiṣyáty āiṣámaḥ parjányo vṛ́ṣṭimān bhaviṣyati  (ÇB.) it is going to
rain; Parjanya is going to be rich in rain this year; yás tán ná véda kím ṛcā́ kariṣyati  (RV.)
whoever does not know that, what will he do with verse?  ā́ vāí vayám agnī́ dhāsyāmahé ‘tha
yūyáṁ kíṁ kariṣyatha (ÇB.) we are going to build the two fires; then what will you do?  tám
índro ‘bhyā́dudrāva haniṣyán (ÇB.) him Indra ran at, intending to slay ; yády evā́ kariṣyátha
sākáṁ devāír yajñíyāso bhaviṣyatha (RV.) if ye will do thus, ye shall be worthy of the sacrifice
along with the gods; dántās te çatsyanti (AV.) thy teeth will fall out; ná mariṣyasi mā́ bibheḥ
(AV.) thou shalt not die; be not afraid ; brūhi kva yāsyasi (MBh.) tell us; where are you going to
go? yadi mām pratyākhyāsyasi viṣam āsthāsye (MBh.) if you shall reject me, I will resort to
poison. As in other languages, the tense is also sometimes used for the expression of a
conjecture or presumption: thus: ko ‘yaṁ devo gandharvo vā bhaviṣyati  (MBh.) who is this? he
is doubtless a god, or a Gandharva; adya svapsyanti (MBh.) they must be sleeping now.
b. The spheres of future and desiderative border upon one another, and the one is
sometimes met with where the other might be expected. Examples of the future taken in a
quasi-desiderative sense are as follows: yád dāçúṣe bhadráṁ kariṣyási távé ’t tát satyám  (RV.)
what favor thou willest to bestow on thy worshiper, that of thee becometh actual  (is surely
brought about); yáthā ’nyád vadiṣyánt sò ‘nyád vádet  (ÇB.) as if, intending to say one thing,
one were to say another.
949. The periphrastic future is defined by the grammarians as expressing something to be
done at a definite time to come. And this, though but faintly traceable in later use, is a distinct
characteristic of the formation in the language where it first makes its appearance. It is
especially often used along with çvás tomorrow.
a. A few examples are: adyá varṣiṣyati...çvó vraṣṭā́  (MS.) it is going to rain today; it will
rain tomorrow; yatarān vā ime çvaḥ kamitāras te jetāras  (K.) whichever of the two parties these
shall choose tomorrow, they will conquer; prātár yaṣṭā́smahe (TB.) we shall sacrifice tomorrow
morning; ityahé vaḥ paktā̀smi (ÇB.) on such and such a day I will cook for you ; tán ma ékāṁ
rā́trim ánte çayitā́se jātá u te ‘yáṁ tárhi putró bhavitā́ (ÇB.) then you shall lie with me one
night, and at that time this son of yours will be born. In other cases, this definiteness of time
is wanting, but an emphasis, as of special certainty, seems perhaps to belong to the form: thus,
bibhṛhí mā pārayiṣyā́mi tvé ’ti: kásmān mā pārayiṣyasī́ ’ty āughá imā́ḥ sárvāḥ prajā́ nirvoḍhā́,
tátas tvā pārayitā̀smī́ ’ti (ÇB.) support me and I will save you, said it. From what will you save
me? said he. A flood is going to carry off all these creatures; from that I will save you, said it;
paridevayāṁ cakrire mahac chokabhayam prāptāsmaḥ (GB.) they set up a lamentation: "we are
going to meet with great pain and dread"; yaje ‘yakṣi yaṣṭāhe ca (TA.) I sacrifice, I have
sacrificed, and I shall sacrifice. In yet other cases,

in the older language even, and yet more in the later, this future appears to be equivalent to
the other: thus, prajāyām enaṁ vijñātāsmo yadi vidvān vā juhoty avidvān vā  (AB.) in his
children we shall know him, whether he is one that sacrifices with knowledge or without
knowledge; vaktāsmo vā idaṁ devebhyaḥ (AB.) we shall tell this to the gods ; yadi svārtho mamā
’pi bhavitā tata evaṁ svārthaṁ kariṣyāmi (MBh.) if later my own affair shall come up, then I
will attend to my own affair; kathaṁ tu bhavitāsy eka iti tvāṁ nṛpa çocimi  (MBh.) but how will
you get along alone? that, O king, is the cause of my grief about you.
950. The conditional would seem to be most originally and properly used to signify that
something was going to be done. And this value it has in its only Vedic occurrence, and
occasionally elsewhere. But usually it has the sense ordinarily called "conditional"; and in the
great majority of its occurrences it is found (like the subjunctive and the optative, when used
with the same value) in both clauses of a conditional sentence.
a. Thus, yó vṛtrā́ya sínam átrā́ ’bhariṣyat prá táṁ jánitrī vidúṣa uvāca  (RV.) him, who was
going here to carry off Vritra's wealth, his mother proclaimed to the knowing one; çatāyuṁ gām
akariṣyam (AB.) I was going to make (should have made) the cow live a hundred years  (in other
versions of the same story is added the other clause, in which the conditional has a value more
removed from its original: thus, in GB., if you, villain, had not stopped  [prā́grahīṣyaḥ] my
mouth); táta evā̀ ’sya bhayáṁ vī̀ ’yāya kásmād dhy ábheṣyad dvitī́yād vāí bhayám bhavati  (ÇB.)
thereupon his fear departed; for of whom was he to be afraid? occasion of fear arises from a
second person; útpapāta ciráṁ tán mene yád vā́saḥ paryádhāsyata  (ÇB.) he leaped up; he
thought it long that he should put on a garment; sá tád evá nā́ ’vindat prajā́patir yátrā́ ’hoṣyat
(MS.) Prajāpati, verily, did not then find where he was to  (should) sacrifice; evaṁ cen nā
’vakṣyo mūrdhā te vyapatiṣyat (GB.) if you should not speak thus, your head would fly off ; sá
yád dhāi ’tā́vad evā́ ’bhaviṣyad yā́vatyo hāi ’vā́ ’gre prajā́ḥ sṛṣṭā́s tā́vatyo hāi ’vā̀ ’bhaviṣyan ná
prā̀ ’janiṣyanta (ÇB.) if he had been only so much, there would have been only so many living
creatures as were created at first; they would have had no progeny; kiṁ vā ’bhaviṣyad aruṇas
tamasāṁ vibhettā taṁ cet sahasrakiraṇo dhuri nā ’kariṣyat (Ç.) would the Dawn, forsooth, be
the scatterer of the darkness, if the thousand-rayed one did not set her on the front of his
chariot?

CHAPTER XIII.
VERBAL ADJECTIVES AND NOUNS: PARTICIPLES, INFINITIVES, GERUNDS.
951 a. Those verbal adjectives, or participles, which are made from tense-stems, and so
constitute a part of the various tense-systems, have been already treated. It remains to describe
certain others, which, being made directly from the root itself, belong to the verbal system as a
whole, and not to any particular part of it.
b. The infinitive (with a few sporadic exceptions in the older language) also comes in all
cases from the root directly, and not from any of the derived tense-stems.
c. The same is true of the so-called gerunds, or indeclinable participles.
Passive Participle in tá or ná.
952. By accented suffix त tá — or, in a comparatively small number of verbs, न ná — is
formed a verbal adjective which, when coming from transitive verbs, qualifies anything as
having endured the action expressed by the verb: thus, द dattá given; उ uktá spoken. Hence
it is usually called the passive participle; or, to distinguish it from the participle belonging to
the passive present-system (771), the past passive participle.
a. When made from an intransitive or neuter verb, the same participle, as in other
languages, has no passive but only an indefinite past sense: thus, गत gatá gone; भूत bhūtá been;
पितत patitá fallen.
953. In general, this participle is made by adding त tá to the bare verbal root, with
observation of the ordinary rules of euphonic combination.
a. Some roots, however, require the prefixion of the auxiliary vowel i to the suffix. For
these, and for the verbs that add ná instead of tá, see below, 956, 957.

b. As to the accent when the root is preceded by a preposition, see 1085 a.
954. The root before त tá has usually its weakest form, if there is anywhere in the verbal
system a distinction of weak and strong forms. Thus:
a. A penultimate nasal is not seldom dropped: examples are aktá (√añj), baddhá (√bandh),
çrabdha (√çrambh), daṣṭá (√daṅç), srasta (√sraṅs), bāḍha (√baṅh).
b. Roots which are abbreviated in the weak forms of the perfect (794) suffer the same
abbreviation here: examples are uktá (√vac) , uṣṭá (√vas shine) , uptá (√vap: also vapta) , ūḍhá
(√vah), suptá (√svap), iṣṭá (√yaj) , viddhá (√vyadh); — and, by a similar procedure, √prach (or
praç) makes pṛṣṭá, √bhraṅç makes bhṛṣṭa (beside the regular bhraṣṭá), and √çra boil makes çṛṭá
(beside çrātá).
c. Final ā is weakened to ī in gītá (√gā sing) , dhītá (√dhā suck) , pītá (√pā drink) , sphīta;
and jītá, vītá, çītá are made from the roots jyā, vyā, çyā, (or jī etc.); — and further to i in chitá
(beside chātá), dita (√dā divide and dā bind), drita (? √drā sleep), hitá (√dhā put: with h for dh;
but dhita also occurs in V.), mitá (√mā measure), çitá (also çāta), sitá, sthitá.
d. A final m is lost after a in gatá, natá, yatá, ratá  (from √gam etc.); and a final n in kṣata,
tatá, matá, hatá. As to the other roots in am and an taking ta, see 955 a, b.
e. More isolated cases are - ūta (RV.: √av), utá or ūta (√vā weave), çiṣṭá (also çāsta: √çās),
mūrtá (referred to √mūrch). As to -gdha and jagdhá, see 233 f.
f. On the other hand, √svad makes svāttá.
955. Of more irregular character are the following:
a. A number of roots ending in am retain the nasal, and lengthen the radical vowel (as also
in some others of their verbal forms): thus, kāṁta, krāṁtá, klāṁtá, kṣāṁta, cāṁta, tāṁtá,
dāṁtá, bhrāṁta, vāṁtá, çāṁtá (√çam be quiet), çrāṁtá (from √kam etc.); and one in an, dhvan
sound, makes dhvāntá.
b. A few roots in an make their participle from another root-form in ā: thus, khātá, jātá,
-vāta, sātá; dham has both dhamitá and dhmātá.
c. Certain roots in īv take their yū-form (765 a): thus, dyūtá (√dīv play), ṣṭhyūta, syūtá; but
√mīv makes -mūta.
d. From roots in changeable ṛ (generally taking na: 957 b) are made also pūrtá (√pṛ fill:
beside pṛta), çīrta and çūrtá (√çṛ crush); and çīrta is further made from √çrī mix.

e. Double forms are mugdhá and mūḍha, sāḍhá and soḍha, dhūrta and dhruta, hvṛta and
hrutá.
f. The root dā give makes dattá (from the secondary root-form dad; but dāta also in V.). But
the anomalously contracted form -tta (as if for dāta, with the radical vowel lost) is also
frequent in composition, especially with prepositions: thus, ā́tta, ánutta, párītta, prátta, prátītta ;
rarely with other elements, as devátta, punartta, marútta (?). And the same abbreviated form
comes from √dā divide in ávatta.
g. The roots making participles in both ta and ita, or ta and na, or in all three, will be
noted in the next two paragraphs.
956. The suffix with इ i, or in the form इत itá, used especially with roots having finals that
are only with difficulty, if at all, combinable with त् t according to the usual analogies of the
language, and often with roots of a secondary, derivative, or late character; but also not seldom
with original roots.
a. Thus, of roots presenting difficulties of combination: — 1. all that end in two consonants
(save those of which one consonant is lost by a weakening process: 964 a, b): e. g. çan̄k, valg,
vāñch, lajj, ubj, ceṣṭ, ghūrṇ, katth, nind, jalp, cumb, umbh, khall, pinv, çaṅs (also çastá) , rakṣ,
hiṅs, garh (in all, over fifty); but takṣ makes taṣṭá; — 2. all that end in linguals (including ṣ
after a or ā): e. g. aṭ, truṭ, paṭh, luṭh, īḍ, vruḍ, bhaṇ, kaṣ, bhāṣ; — 3. all that end in surd
spirants: e. g. likh, grath, nāth, kuth, riph, guph ; — 4. all that end in l: e. g. cal, gil, mīl, lul,
khel: — 6. all that end in other persistent semivowels: namely, carv (also cūrṇa), jīv (for the
other roots in īv, see 955 c), dhāv run, sev, day, vyay, pūy; — 6. ujh. — This class includes
more than half of the whole number that take only ita.
b. Of other roots ending in consonants: — 1. in gutturals, cak, ḍhāuk (çak has both ta and
ita); çlāgh; — 2. in palatals, ac (also akná), uc, kuc, khac, yāc, ruc; aj?, kūj, vraj, also tyaj and
mṛj in late texts (usually tyaktá and mṛṣṭá); — 3. in dentals, at, pat, çcut, also yat in epos
(elsewhere only yattá); krad, khād, gad, cud, nad, mud, mṛd, rad, rud, vad, vid  know, hrād; also
nud in epos (elsewhere nuttá and nunna) ; mad has both mattá and maditá (the majority of
roots in d take na: 957 d); edh, kṣudh, gadh, dudh, nādh, bādh, spardh ; an, in, kvan, dhvan,
pan, ran ring, van, stan, svan, and dhvan (also dhvāntá); — 4. in labials, cup, yup, rup, and
usually kup (kupta late) and lap (lapta epic), occasionally kṣip, gup, tap, dṛp, vap, çap , while
jap has both ta and ita; grabh (gṛbhītá), çubh, skabh, and occasionally lubh, while kṣubh and
stabh have both forms; tim, dham, çam labor, stim, and kṣam in epos (also kṣāṁta); — 5. in
spirants, aç eat, īç, kāç, kṛç, vāç, çac ,

while piç has both forms, and mṛç takes ita only late; iṣ send, īṣ, kuṣ, tṛṣ, tviṣ, pruṣ, miṣ, rūṣ,
heṣ, hreṣ, also muṣ except late, while dhṛṣ, ruṣ, and hṛṣ show both forms; ās, bhas, bhās, ras,
las, vas clothe, has, also as throw occasionally, while kas, gras, yas, vas shine, vas dwell, çās
(with çiṣṭá and çāsta), çvas, and hras make both forms; īh, grah (gṛhītá), jah (secondary form of
hā), mah, rah, and occasionally ūh remove, while gāh has both forms.
c. Of roots ending in vowels, only çī lie, which makes çayita (with guṇa of root, as
elsewhere: 629).
d. In general, a root maintains its full form before ita; but there are a few exceptions: thus,
gṛbhītá and gṛhītá (the root being reckoned as grabh and grah: see 729), uditá (also vadita in
the later language), uṣita (√vas shine; beside uṣṭá) , uṣita (√vas dwell: also sporadically vasita
and uṣṭa), ukṣitá (√vaká increase), çṛthitá (√çrath). From √mṛj are made both mṛjita and mārjita
(with strengthening as in present and elsewhere: 627), beside mṛṣṭá.
e. Instead of i, long ī is taken in gṛbhītá and gṛhītá.
957. The suffix न ná (always without auxiliary इ i) is taken instead of त tá by a number of
roots (about seventy). Thus:
a. Certain roots in ā: thus, kṣā, glā, drā run, drā sleep, (also drita?), mlā (also mlātá) , vā
blow (also vāta), çyā (also çīná), styā, hā leave (also hīná and hāta), hā go forth; and dā divide
makes diná (also dita and -tta). Further, certain roots in i- and u-vowels: thus, kṣi destroy
(kṣīṇa; also kṣitá), ḍī, pī, lī cling, vlī, çī or çyā coagulate (beside çyāna and çīta) , hrī (beside
hrīta); dū burn (also duta), lū, çū; and dīv lament makes dyūna (compare 765).
b. Roots in ṛ, which before the suffix becomes īr or ūr: the forms are, arṇa (late; beside
ṛtá), kīrṇa (√kṛ scatter), gīrṇá (√gṛ swallow), jīrṇá and jūrṇá (√jṛ waste away) , tīrṇá and tūrṇa
(also tūrtá) , dīrṇá (√dṛ pierce: also dṛta) , pūrṇá (√pṛ fill: also pūrtá and pṛta) , mūrṇá (√mṛ
crush), çīrṇá (√çṛ crush: also çīrta and çūrtá?), stīrṇá (also stṛta). Of like character with these
are īrṇá from √īr, cīrṇa (beside carita) from √car, gūrṇa (beside gūrtá) from √gur, a secondary
form of gṛ, and cūrṇa (beside carvita) from √carv, which is also plainly a secondary root.
c. A few roots ending in j (which becomes g before the suffix, against the usual rule of
internal combination: 216 f): thus, bhagna (√bhañj), bhugna (√bhuj bend), magná (√majj), rugṇá,
vigna (beside vikta). Further, two or three ending in c (similarly treated): thus, akná (√ac or
añc: also acita and añcita) , vṛkná (√vraçc), and apparently -pṛgṇa (RV., once: with doubly
irregular change of root-final, from √pṛc). And one root in g, lagna.

d. A considerable number, some of them very common ones, of roots in d (which, against
ordinary rule, becomes n before the suffix: 157 b). The forms are: unna (also utta) , arṇṇa?,
klinna, kṣuṇṇa, kṣviṇṇa, khinna, channa, chinná, chṛṇṇá, tunná, tṛṇṇá, nunna  (also nuttá and
nudita), panná, bhinná, vinna (√vid find: also vittá), çanna (√çad fall), sanná (also sattá), skanná
(√skand), syanná (√syand), svinná, hanna. And ánna food, in spite of its different accent, appears
to be a like formation from √ad eat.
958. The native grammarians reckon as participles of this formation a few miscellaneous
derivative adjectives, coming from roots which do not make a regular participle: such are kṣāma
burnt, kṛçá emaciated, pakvá ripe, phullá expanded, çúṣka dry.
Past Active Participle in tavant (or navant).
959. From the past passive participle, of whatever formation, is made, by adding the
possessive suffix व् vant, a secondary derivative having the meaning and construction of a
perfect active participle: for example, तत् तवान् tát kṛtávān having done that; taṁ nigīrṇavān
having swallowed him down. Its inflection is like that of other derivatives made with this suffix
(452 ff.); its feminine ends in वती vatī; its accent remains on the participle.
960. Derivative words of this formation are found in RV., but without anything like a
participial value. The AV. has a single example, with participial meaning: açitā́vaty átithāu one's
guest having eaten (loc. abs.). In the Brāhmaṇas also it is hardly met with. In the later
language, however, it comes to be quite common. And there it is chiefly used predicatively, and
oftenest without copula expressed, or with the value of a personal verb-form in a past tense:
primarily, and not seldom, signifying immediate past, or having a true "perfect" value; but also
(like the old perfect and the old aorist in later use) coming to be freely used for indefinite time,
or with the value of the imperfect (779). For example: māṁ na kaçcid dṛṣṭavān no one has
seen (or saw) me; sa nakulaṁ vyāpāditavān he destroyed the ichneumon; or, with copula, mahat
kṛcchram prāptavaty asi thou hast fallen upon great misery . Although originally and properly
made only from transitive verbs (with an object, to which the participle in ta stands in the
relation of an objective predicate), it is finally found also from intransitives: thus, cūtena
saṁçritavatī (Ç.) has become united with the mango-tree; gatavatī (ib.) she has gone.
a. The same participle is also made in the secondary conjugations: e. g. darçitavant having
shown, prabodhitavant having awakened.

b. Possessives also in in made from passive participles are sometimes found used in an
analogous manner, nearly as perfect active participles: e. g. iṣṭín having sacrificed, vijitino
manyamānāḥ (AB.) thinking themselves to have conquered .
Future Passive Participles: Gerundives.
961. Certain derivative adjectives (for the most part more or less clearly secondary
derivatives) have acquired in the language a value as qualifying something which is to, or
which ought to, suffer the action expressed by the root from which they come; and they are
allowed to be made from every verb. Hence they are, like more proper participles, sometimes
treated as a part of the general verbal system, and called future passive participles, or
gerundives (like the Latin forms in ndus, to which they correspond in meaning).
962. The suffixes by which such gerundives are regularly and ordinarily made are three:
namely य ya, त tavya, and अनीय anīya.
a. Derivatives in ya having this value are made in all periods of the language, from the
earliest down; the other two are of more modern origin, being entirely wanting in the oldest
Veda (RV.), and hardly known in the later. Other derivatives of a similar character, which
afterward disappear from use, are found in the Veda (966).
963. The suffix ya in its gerundive use has nothing to distinguish it from the same suffix as
employed to make adjectives and nouns of other character (see below, 1213). And it exhibits
also the same variety in the treatment of the root.
a. The original value of the suffix is ia, and as such it has to be read in the very great
majority of its Vedic occurrences. Hence the conversion of e and o to ay and av before it (see
below).
b. Thus: 1. Final ā becomes e before the suffix: déya, dhyeya, khyéya, méya (perhaps dā́-ia
etc., with euphonic y interposed); but RV. has once -jñāya. — 2. The other vowels either remain
unchanged, or have the guṇa or the vṛddhi strengthening; and e usually and o always are
treated before the ya as they would be before a vowel: thus, -kṣayya, jáyya, bháyya, lāyya;
návya, bhávya, hávya, bhāvyá; vā́rya: and, in the later language, nīya, jeya, dhūya (such cases
are wanting earlier). In a few instances, a short vowel adds t

before the suffix: thus, itya, mitya, çrútya, stútya, kṛtya (the only Vedic examples). — 3. Medial
a remains unchanged or is lengthened: thus, dábhya, vándya, sádya; mā́dya, vā́cya. — 4. Medial
i-, u-, and ṛ-vowels are unchanged or have the guṇa-strengthening: thus, ī́ḍya, gúhya, dhṛṣya;
dvéṣya, yódhya, márjya.
c. The RV. has about forty examples of this gerundive, and the AV. adds half as many more.
Except in bhāviá (once), the accent in RV. is always on the root; AV. has several cases of
accent on the i of the suffix (hence written ādyà, āçyà, -vyādhyà, -dharṣyà). According to the
grammarians, the accent is on the root or else the ending is circumflexed: always the former, if
the ya follow a vowel.
964. a. The suffix tavya is a secondary adjective derivative from the infinitival noun in tu
(below, 968), made by adding the suffix ya (properly ía, whence the accent yà), before which
the final u, as usual (1203 a), has guṇa-strengthening, and is resolved into av.
b. Hence, as regards both the form taken by the root and the use or omission of an
auxiliary vowel i before the tavya, the rules are the same as for the formation of the infinitive
(below, 968).
c. No example of this formation is found in RV., and in AV. occur only two, janitavyà and
hiṅsitavyà. In the Brāhmaṇa language it begins to be not rare, and is made both from the
simple root and from the derived conjugational stems (next chapter); in the classical language it
is still more frequent. According to the grammarians, the accent of the word is either
circumflex on the final or acute on the penult: thus, kartavyà or kartávya; in the accentuated
texts, it is always the former (the accent távya given to certain gerundives in the Petersburg
lexicons is an error, growing out of the ambiguous accentuation of ÇB.: 88 c).
965. a. The suffix anīya is in like manner the product of secondary derivation, made by
adding the adjective suffix īya (1215) to a nomen actionis formed by the common suffix ana.
b. It follows, then, as regards its mode of formation, the rules for the suffix ana (below,
1150).
c. This derivative also is unknown in RV., and in AV. is found only in upajīvanī́ya and
āmantranī́ya (in both of which, moreover, its distinct gerundive value admits of question). In the
Brāhmaṇas (where less than a dozen examples of it have been noted), and in the later
language, it is less common than the gerundive in tavya. Its accent, as in all the derivatives
with the suffix īya, is on the penult: thus, karaṇī́ya.
966. Other formations of kindred value are found in the Veda as follows:
a. Gerundives in tua or tva, apparently made from the infinitival noun in tu with the added
suffix a (1209). They are kártua (in two occurrences kártva), -gaṁtva, jántua, jétua, náṁtua,
váktua, sótua,

snā́tua, hántua, hétua, hótva; and, with auxiliary i (or ī), jánitva, sánitva, bhávītva.
b. Gerundives in enia or enya (compare 1217): they are īkṣeṇía, īḍénia, caréṇia, dṛçénia,
-dviṣeṇia, bhūṣéṇya, yudhénia, váreṇia  (and bhajenya BhP.); with one example from an apparent
aorist-stem, yaṁsénya, and three or four from secondary verb-stems (see below, 1019, 1038,
1068 a).
c. Gerundives in ā́yia (once ā́yya: compare 1218): they are dakṣā́yia, panā́yia, vidā́yia,
çravā́yia, hnavāyia; with a few from secondary conjugation-stems (below, 1019, 1038, 1051,
1068a); and stuṣéyia is of close kindred with them.
d. A few adjectives in elima, as pacelima, bhidelima (only these quotable), are reckoned as
gerundives by the grammarians.
967. The division-line between participial and ordinary adjectives is less strictly drawn in
Sanskrit than in the other Indo-European languages. Thus, adjectives in u, as will be seen later
(1178), from secondary conjugational stems, have participial value; and in the Brāhmaṇas (with
an example or two in AV.) is found widely and commonly used a participial adjective formed
with the suffix uka (1180).
Infinitives.
968. The later language has only a single infinitive, which is the accusative case of a verbal
noun formed by the suffix तु tu, added to the root usually directly, but often also with aid of the
preceding auxiliary vowel इ i. The form of the infinitive ending, therefore, is तुम् tum or इतुम्
itum. The root has the guṇa-strengthening, and is accented. Thus, for example, एतुम् étum from
√इ i; कतुम् kártum from √ kṛ; चिरतुम् cáritum from √च car; भिवतुम् bhávitum from √भू bhū.
a. As regards the use or omission of i, the infinitive (as also the gerund in tvā: 991) follows
in general the analogy of the passive participle (956). Examples are (with the gerund added) as
follows: dagdhá, dágdhum, dagdhvā́ from √dah; bhinná, bhéttum, bhittvā́ from √bhid; matá,
mántum, matvā́ from √man; ūḍhá, vóḍhum, ūḍhvā́  from √vah; patitá, pátitum, patitvā́  from √pat;
yācitá, yā́citum, yācitvā́  from √yāc; çayitá, çáyitum, çayitvā́  from √çī. But certain exceptions and
special cases require notice. Thus:
b. Of roots having no quotable participle, infinitive stems in tu are made from ad, sagh; in
itu from uñch, ūh consider, kṣap, luṇṭh, lok, svar ; and in both from yabh.

c. Of roots making participles of both forms, an infinitive stem in tu only is quotable for
kṣip, kṣubh, tap, tyaj, mṛç, lubh, vas  shine, çak, stabh; only in itu for gāh, carv, jap, mad, yat,
van, çaṅs, çvas; in both for as throw, ūh remove, gup, car, mṛj (mā̆rṣṭu, mārjitu), lap, vas dwell,
çap, çās.
d. Also in a number of other cases (besides those already noticed) an infinitive stem is made
both with and without i. Thus, in addition to the more regular form, a stem in itu is
occasionally met with from roots aç attain, iṣ seek, bandh, bhaj, yaj (ījitum), rudh obstruct, ruh,
vṛṣ, sad (sīditum), sah, han, hṛ; and one in tu from roots ās, bhāṣ, vid know. Both forms occur
also from certain am-roots, namely nam, yam, ram, and, with ā before tu as in the pple, kram
and bhram (kṣam has only kṣaṁtu, against the analogy of kṣāṁta); further, from certain roots
in variable ṛ, namely tṛ (tartu, tarī ̆tu), vṛ cover (vártu, varī ̆tu), and stṛ (stártu, staritu, stárītu)
(but from çṛ crush occur only çárītu, çaritu, and from vṛ choose only varītu; while gṛ swallow
and pṛ fill make their infinitive from other root-forms, namely giritum, pūritum); further, from a
few vowel-roots, namely nī, cyu, sū (sū́tu); and finally from kṛṣ, nṛt, çuc.
e. Against the analogy of the participle, infinitive-stems in itu after a final consonant are
made from the roots av, kṣan, khan and jan (the pples coming from khā and jā) , guh, jabh,
tam, dīv play and dīv lament (both devitu), majj, vṛt, vṛdh, sṛp; and after a final vowel, from
roots in ū, namely pū, bhū, sū (also sūtu), and from çri and çvi; as to roots in variable ṛ, see
just above, d.
f. As the infinitive is made from the (accented and) strengthened root, so it naturally has, as
a rule, the stronger or fuller root-form where a weaker or contracted form is taken by the
participle (and gerund in tvā́): e. g. váktu against uktá (and uktvā́) , yáṣṭu against iṣṭá (and
iṣṭvā́), banddhum against baddhá (and baddhvā́), and so on. Deserving special notice are gātu
(√gā sing) against gītá, and dhā́tu (√dhā suck) against dhītá; and so from dā give and hā leave
are made only dā́tu and hātu; but dhā put, mā measure, and sthā add to the regular dhātu,
mātu, sthātu the late forms -dhitu, -mitu, -sthitu; and sā or si has sātu, sétu, and -situ; vā
weave (pple utá) has both vā́tu and ótu; hū or hvā has havītu, hváyitu, and hvātu. The root
vyadh makes its only quotable infinitive, veddhum, from its vidh-form; from sañj or saj occur
both san̄ktu and saktu. The anomalous epic forms ījitum (√yaj) and sīditum (√sad), were
mentioned above. The root grab makes gráhītum.
g. In the later language, the infinitive-stem forms possessive compounds with kāma and
manas (especially the former): e. g. svaptukāma having the wish to sleep, yaṣṭukāma desirous of
sacrificing, vaktumanas minded to speak.
h. In very rare instances, dative infinitives in tave or tavāi are

made from the infinitive stem in the later language (as abundantly in the earlier: 970 b): thus,
pratihartave (BhP.). And jīvase (973 a) is once found in MBh. (i. 3. 67 = 732), in a quasi-Vedic
hymn to the Açvins.
969. In the Veda and Brāhmaṇa, however, a number of verbal nouns, nomina actionis, in
various of their cases, are used in constructions which assimilate them to the infinitive of other
languages — although, were it not for these other later and more developed and pronounced
infinitives, the constructions in question might pass as ordinary case-constructions of a
somewhat peculiar kind.
970. The nouns thus used infinitively are the following:
a. The root-noun, without derivative suffix, is so used in its accusative in am, its dative in e
or (from ā-roots) āi, its genitive and ablative in as, and its locative in i.
b. The verbal noun in tu is so used in its accusative in tum, its dative in tave or tavāí, and
its ablative and genitive in tos.
Of other nouns only single cases, generally datives, are reckoned as used with infinitive
value; thus:
c. From the verbal noun in as, the dative in ase; and also, in an extremely small number of
instances, a dative in se (or ṣe), from a noun formed with s simply.
d. From nouns in man and van, datives in mane and vane.
e. From nouns in ti, datives in taye, or (from one or two verbs) in tyāi.
f. From nouns in i, datives in áye.
g. From nouns in dhi and ṣi, datives in dhyāi and ṣyāi.
h. A few infinitives in ṣaṇi are perhaps locatives from nouns in an added to a root increased
by s.
i. From a single root, dhṛ, are made infinitively used forms in tári, of which the grammatical
character is questionable.
j. Among all these, the forms which have best right to special treatment as infinitives, on
account of being of peculiar formation, or from suffixes not found in other uses, or for both
reasons, are those in ṣe, ṣaṇi, tari, dhyāi, and tavāi.
k. Except the various cases of the derivative in tu, and of the root-noun, these infinitives are
almost wholly unknown outside the Rig-Veda.
l. Other suffixes and forms than those noticed above might be added; for it is impossible to
draw any fixed line between the uses classed as infinitive and the ordinary case-uses: thus,
prajā́patim praçnám āitām (TS.) they went to ask Prajāpati; víçvaṁ jīvám prasuvántī carā́yāi
(RV.) quickening every living being to motion ; apáḥ sármāya codáyan (RV.) impelling the waters
to flow; çaknuyā́d gráhaṇāya (instead of the usual gráhītum: ÇB.) may be able to apprehend ; ā

tamanāt (instead of the usual tamitoḥ: S.) until exhaustion. And the so-called infinitives

are found coördinated in the same sentence with common nouns, and even with compound
nouns: e. g. cáritave... ābhogáya iṣṭáye rāyé (RV.) to go abroad, to enjoy, to seek wealth ;
ārtatrāṇāya na prahartum anāgasi (Ç.) for the rescue of the distressed, not for hurling at the
innocent.
More special rules as to the various formations are as follows:
971. The root-noun used as infinitive has the same form (except that it does not take an
added t: 383 f), and the same accent, both when simple and when combined with prepositions,
as in its other uses. In the very great majority of instances, it is made from roots ending in a
consonant; but also from a few in ā (khyā, dā, dhā, pā?, mā, yā), from two or three in i- and u-
vowels (hi, mī, bhū), and from one or two in changeable ṛ, which takes the ir-form (tir, stir).
a. The roots in ā form the accus. in ām, the dat. in āi, the abl. in ās (understanding avasā́
before ā́ as for avasā́s and not avasāí in RV. iii. 53. 20), and the locative in e (only two
examples, of which one is perhaps better understood as dative).
972. The infinitive noun in tu is made freely from roots of every form. The root takes the
guṇa-strengthening, if capable of it, and often adds the auxiliary vowel i before the suffix
(according to the rules already stated, 968). The root is accented, unless the noun be combined
with a preposition, in which case the latter has the accent instead: thus, kártum, étave, hántos;
but níkartum, níretave, nírhantos.
a. The dative in tavāi is in two respects anomalous: in having the heavy feminine ending āi
along with a strengthened u; and in taking a double accent, one on the root or on the prefixed
preposition, and the other on the ending āi: thus, étavāí, hántavāí, átyetavāí, ápabhartavāí.
973. a. The infinitive in ase is made in RV. from about twenty-five roots; in AV. and later
there have been noted no other examples of it. In near three quarters of the cases, the accent
is on the suffix: e. g. ṛñjáse, jīváse, bhiyáse, tujáse ; the exceptions are cákṣase; dhā́yase (with y
inserted before the suffix: 258); and áyase, bhárase, spárase, hárase (with guṇa-strengthening of
the root). Strengthening of the root is also shown by javáse, doháse, bhojáse, çobháse. In
puṣyáse is seen, apparently, the present-stem instead of the root.
b. The ending se is extremely rare, being found only in jiṣé and perhaps stuṣé, and one or
two still more doubtful cases.
974. Infinitives in mane are made from only five roots: thus, trā́maṇe, dā́mane, dármaṇe,
bhármaṇe, and (with different accent) vidmáne. From √dā comes dāváne; turváṇe may come
directly from √tṛ, or through the secondary root turv; dhū́rvaṇe is rather from √dhūrv than from
√dhvṛ.
975. a. The infinitives in taye are iṣṭáye (√iṣ), pītáye (√pā drink), vītáye, sātáye, and perhaps
ūtáye (ūtáye nṝ́n to help his men:

(RV.). In tyāi, the only examples noted are ityāí (RV.) and sā́ḍhyāi (MS. AB.).
b. With aye are formed iṣáye, tujáye, dṛçáye, maháye, yudháye, sanáye ; and citáye (VS.),
gṛhaye (K.).
976. The ending dhyāi is, more than any other, irregular and various in its treatment. It has
always an a before it; and in the majority of cases it is accented upon this a, and added to a
weak form of root: thus, çucádhyāi, pṛṇádhyāi, dhiyádhyāi, huvádhyāi. But the form of root is
the strong one in a few cases: namely, çayádhyāi, stavádhyāi, tarádhyāi, jarádhyāi, mandádhyāi,
vandádhyāi. In half-a-dozen forms, again, the root has the accent: namely, kṣáradhyāi,
gámadhyāi, yájadhyāi (but once or twice also yajádhyāi), váhadhyāi, sáhadhyāi, bháradhyāi. In a
single 
instance, píbadhyāi, the suffix is added distinctly to a present-stem; and in one,
vāvṛdhádhyāi, to a perfect stem. Finally, in a number of instances (ten), this infinitive is made
from a causative stem in ay: thus, mādayádhyāi, riṣayádhyāi, etc.
a. This infinitive is by no means rare in RV., being made in thirty-five different forms (with
seventy-two occurrences). But it is hardly known outside of the RV.; the AV. has it but once (in
a passage found also in RV.); and elsewhere half-a-dozen examples have been noticed, in
mantra-passages (one of them TS. falsely reads gámadhye); in the Brāhmaṇa language proper it
appears to be entirely wanting.
977. An example or two are met with of an infinitive in ṣyāi: thus, róhiṣyāi (TS.), avyathiṣyāi
(K. Kap.; MS. avyáthiṣe; VS. vyathiṣat), and perhaps -dhāsyāi (PGS.).
978. The infinitives in ṣaṇi are: iṣáṇi (?) from √iṣ send, -bhūṣáṇi from √bhū; çūṣáṇi from √çū
or çvā; neṣáṇi from √nī; sakṣáṇi from √sah; parṣáṇi from √pṛ, tarīṣáṇi from √tṛ; and gṛṇīṣáṇi and
-stṛṇīṣáṇi from √√gṛ and stṛ — the last containing evident present tense-signs (compare the 1st
sing. gṛṇīṣé, 894 d).
979. The only infinitive in tari is dhartári (with its compound vidhartári), from √dhṛ.
Uses of the Infinitives.
980. The uses of the so-called infinitives are for the most part closely accordant with those
of the corresponding cases from other abstract nouns. Thus:
981. The accusative, which is made only from the root-noun and the noun in tu, is used as
object of a verb.
a. Especially, of forms from the root çak be able, and arh be worthy, have the right or the
power. Thus, çakéma tvā samídham (RV.) may we accomplish thy kindling; mā́ çakan pratidhā́m
íṣum (AV.) may they not be able to fit the arrow to the string ; máno vā́ imā́ṁ sadyáḥ páry-

āptum arhati mánaḥ páribhavitum (TS.) the mind, forsooth, can at once attain and surpass her ;
kó hy ètásyā́ ’rhati gúhyaṁ nā́ma gráhītum  (ÇB.) for who is worthy to take his secret name?  In
the Veda, the construction with these verbs is only one among others; in the Brāhmaṇa, it
becomes the greatly prevalent one (three quarters or more of all the cases).
b. Further, of verbs of motion (next most frequent case): thus, dā́kṣiṇāni hótum eti (TS.) he
goes to sacrifice things pertaining to sacrificial gifts; índram pratíram emy ā́yuḥ (RV.) I go to
Indra for (i. e. beseech of him) the lengthening out of life ; — of √dhṛ persist in, undertake: as,
sá idáṁ jātáḥ sárvam evá dágdhuṁ dadhre  (ÇB.) he, as soon as born, began to burn this
universe; — of verbs meaning desire, hope, notice, know, and the like: as, pā́çān vicṛ́taṁ vettha
sárvān (AV.) thou knowest how to loosen all bonds; tásmād agníṁ nā́ ”driyeta párihantum  (ÇB.)
therefore one should not be careful to smother the fire ; — and of others.
982. Of the infinitive datives, the fundamental and usual sense is that expressed by for, in
order to, for the purpose of.
Examples are: víçaṁ jīváṁ caráse bodháyantī (RV.) awakening every living creature to
motion; tā́n úpa yāta píbadhyāi (RV.) come to drink them; nāí ’tā́ṁ te devā́ adadur áttave  (AV.)
the gods did not give her to thee for eating ; praí ”d yudháye dásyum índraḥ (RV.) Indra went
forward to fight the demon; cákṣur no dhehi vikhyāí  (RV.) give us sight for looking abroad .
Some peculiar constructions, however, grow out of this use of the infinitive dative. Thus:
a. The noun which is logically the subject or the object of the action expressed by the
infinitive is frequently put beside it in the dative (by a construction which is in part a perfectly
simple one, but which is stretched beyond its natural boundaries by a kind of attraction): thus,
cakāra sū́ryāya pánthām ánvetavā́ u  (RV.) he made a track for the sun to follow  (made for the
sun a track for his following); çíçīte çṛ́n̄ge rákṣobhyo viníkṣe (RV.) he whets his horns to pierce
the demons; rudrā́ya dhánur a tanomi brahmadvíṣe çárave hántavā́ u  (RV.) I stretch the bow for
Rudra, that with his arrow he may slay the brahma-hater; asmábhyaṁ dṛçáye sū́ryāya púnar
dātām ásum (RV.) may they grant life again, that we may see the sun .
b. An infinitive with √kṛ make is used nearly in the sense of a causative verb: thus, prā́
’ndháṁ çroṇáṁ cákṣasa étave kṛthaḥ (RV.) ye make the blind and lame to see and go ; agníṁ
samídhe cakártha (RV.) thou hast made the fire to be kindled . Of similar character is an
occasional construction with another verb: as, yád īm uçmási kártave kárat tát  (RV.) what we
wish to be done, may he do that; kavī́ṅr icchāmi saṁdṛ́çe  (RV.) I desire to see the sages .
c. A dative infinitive is not seldom used as a predicate, sometimes

with, but more usually without, a copula expressed: thus, agnír iva ná pratidhṛ́ṣe bhavati (TS.)
like fire, he is not to be resisted ; mahimā́ te anyéna ná saṁnáçe (VS.) thy greatness is not to
be attained by another; nákim índro níkartave ná çakráḥ páriçaktave  (RV.) Indra is not to be
put down, the mighty one is not to be overpowered.
d. Sometimes an infinitive so used without a copula has quite nearly the value of an
imperative: thus, tyā́ me yaçásā... āuçijó huvádhyāi [asti] (RV.) these glorious ones shall the son
of Uçij invoke for me; sūktébhir vaḥ... índrā nv àgnī́ ávase huvádhyāi  [staḥ] (RV.) with your
hymns shall ye call now on Indra and Agni for aid; vandádhyā agníṁ námobhiḥ [asmi] (RV.) let
me greet Agni with homage; asmā́kāsaç ca sūráyo víçvā ā́çās tarīṣáṇi  (RV.) and let our
sacrifices cross all regions; tán nāí ’váṁ kártavāí (MS.) that must not be done so ; brahmadvíṣaḥ
çárave hántavā́ u (RV.) let the arrow slay the brahma-haters . The infinitives in dhyāi and ṣaṇi
(which latter is in all its uses accordant with datives) are those in which the imperative value
is most distinctly to be recognized.
e. In the Brāhmaṇas and Sūtras (especially in ÇB.) the dative in tavāi is not seldom used
with a verb signifying speak (brū, vac, ah), to express the ordering of anything to be done:
thus, tásmād óṣadhīnām evá mū́lāny úcchettavāí brūyāt  (ÇB.) therefore let him direct the roots
of the plants to be cut up (speak in order to their cutting up : cf. yé vaçā́yā ádānāya vádanti
who dissuade from giving the cow : AV.).
983. The ablative infinitive — which, like the accusative, is made only from the root-noun
and that in tu — is found especially with the prepositions ā́ until and purā́ before.
a. Thus, ā́ támitoḥ (TS. etc.) until exhaustion; purā́ vācáḥ právaditoḥ (TS.) before utterance
of the voice. In the Brāhmaṇa language, this is the well-nigh exclusive construction of the
ablative (it occurs also with prāk, arvāk, etc.); in the Veda, the latter is used also after ṛté
without, and after several verbs, as trā and pā protect, yu separate, bhī, etc.
b. In a few instances, by an attraction similar to that illustrated above for the dative (982
a), a noun dependent on this infinitive is put in the ablative beside it: thus, purā vāgbhyaḥ
sampravaditoḥ (PB.) before the utterance together of the voices ; trā́dhvaṁ kartā́d avapádaḥ
(RV.) save us from falling down into the pit ; purā dakṣiṇābhyo netoḥ (Āpast.) before the gifts
are taken away.
984. The genitive infinitive (having the same form as the ablative) is in common use in the
Brāhmaṇa language as dependent on īçvará lord, master, employed adjectively in the sense of
capable or likely or exposed to.
a. Examples are: tā́ [devátāḥ] īçvarā́ enam pradáhaḥ (TS.) they are likely to burn him up;
átha ha vā́ īçvarò ‘gníṁ citvā́ kíṁcid dāuritám ā́pattor ví vā hválitoḥ (ÇB.) so in truth he is
liable,

after piling the fire, to meet with some mishap or other, or to stagger ; içvaraṁ vāi rathantaram
udgātuç cakṣuḥ pramathitoḥ (PB.) the rathantara is liable to knock out the eye of the chanter .
b. The dative is used in ÇB. instead of the genitive in a single phrase ( īçvarāú jánayitavāí);
and, in the later language, sometimes the accusative in turn. In a case or two the masc. sing.
nom. īçvaraḥ is used, without regard to the gender or number of the word which it qualifies:
thus, tásye ”çvaráḥ prajā́ pā́pīyasī bhávitoḥ (ÇB.) his progeny is liable to deteriorate . And in a
very few instances the word īçvara is omitted, and the genitive has the same value without it:
thus, dve madhyaṁdinam abhi pratyetoḥ (AB.) two may be added to the noon libation ; táto
dīkṣitáḥ pāmanó bhávitoḥ (ÇB.) then the consecrated is liable to get the itch .
c. This construction with īçvara, which is the only one for the genitive infinitive in the
Brāhmaṇa, is unknown in the Veda, where the genitive is found in a very small number of
examples with madhyā́, and with the root īç: thus, madhyā́ kártoḥ (RV.) in the midst of action ;
ī́çe rāyó dā́toḥ (RV.) he is master of the giving of wealth ; ī́çe yótoḥ (RV.) is able to keep away .
985. Unless the infinitives in ṣaṇi and tari are locative in form (their uses are those of
datives), the locative infinitive is so rare, and has so little that is peculiar in its use, that it is
hardly worth making any account of. An example is uṣáso budhí (RV.) at the awakening of the
dawn.
986. In the Veda, the dative infinitive forms are very much more numerous than the
accusative (in RV., their occurrences are twelve times as many; in AV., more than three times);
and the accusative in tum is rare (only four forms in RV., only eight in AV.). In the Brāhmaṇas,
the accusative has risen to much greater comparative frequency (its forms are nearly twice as
many as those of the dative); but the ablative-genitive, which is rare in the Veda, has also come
to full equality with it. The disappearance in the classical language of all excepting the
accusative in tum (but see 968 h) is a matter for no small surprise.
987. The later infinitive in tum is oftenest used in constructions corresponding to those of
the earlier accusative: thus, na vāṣpam açakat soḍhurn he could not restrain his tears ; taṁ
draṣṭum arhasi thou oughtest to see it ; prāptum icchanti they desire to obtain; saṁkhyātum
ārabdham having begun to count. But also, not infrequently, in those of the other cases. So,
especially, of the dative: thus, avasthātuṁ sthānāntaraṁ cintaya devise another place to stay in ;
tvām anveṣṭum ihā ”gataḥ he has come hither to seek for thee ; — but likewise of the genitive:
thus, samartho gantum capable of going; saṁdhātum īçvaraḥ able to mend. Even a construction
as nominative is not unknown: thus, yuktaṁ tasya mayā samāçvā-

sayitum bhāryām (MBh.) it is proper for me to comfort his wife ; na naptāraṁ svayaṁ nyāyyaṁ
çaptum evam (R.) it is not suitable thus to curse one's own grandson ; tad vaktuṁ na pāryate
(Çatr.) it is not possible to say that .
988. In the later language, as in the earlier, the infinitive in certain connections has what
we look upon as a passive value. Thus, kartum ārabdhaḥ begun to be made; çrotuṁ na yujyate
it is not fit to be heard  (for hearing). This is especially frequent along with the passive forms of
√çak: thus, tyaktuṁ na çakyate it cannot be abandoned; çakyāv ihā ”netum they two can be
brought hither; na ca vibhūtayaḥ çakyam avāptum ūrjitāḥ nor are mighty successes a thing
capable of being attained.
Gerunds.
989. The so-called gerund is a stereotyped case (doubtless instrumental) of a verbal noun,
used generally as adjunct to the logical subject of a clause, denoting an accompanying or (more
often) a preceding action to that signified by the verb of the clause. It has thus the virtual
value of an indeclinable participle, present or past, qualifying the actor whose action it
describes.
a. Thus, for example: çrutvāi ’va cā ’bruvan and hearing (or having heard) they spoke;
tebhyaḥ pratijñāyā ’thāi ’tān paripapraccha  having given them his promise, he then questioned
them.
990. The gerund is made in the later language by one of the two suffixes ा tvā and य ya,
the former being used with a simple root, the latter with one that is compounded with a
prepositional prefix — or, rarely, with an element of another kind, as adverb or noun.
a. To this distribution of uses between the two suffixes there are occasional exceptions.
Thus, gerunds in ya from simple roots are not very rare in the epic language (e. g. gṛhya, uṣya
[√vas dwell] , arcya, īkṣya, cintya, tyajya, lakṣya; also from causatives and denominatives, as
vācya, yojya, plāvya), and are not unknown elsewhere (e. g. arcya and īkṣya M., prothya AGS.,
sthāpya ÇvU.). And gerunds in tvā from compounded roots are met with in considerable
numbers from AV. (only pratyarpayitvā́) down: e. g. samīrayitvā́ MS., virocayitvā́ TA., utkṣiptvā
U . , pratyuktvā 
E., pratyasitvā 
S., prahasitvā 
MBh., saṁdarçayitvā 
MBh., vimuktvā R.,
nivedayitvā R., proktvā Pañc., anupītva VBS.: the great majority of them are made from the
causative stem.

b. The prefixion of the negative particle, a or an, does not cause the gerund to take the
form in ya: thus, akṛtvā, amīrayitvā (but R. has acintya). Of compounds with other than verbal
prefixes, 
RV. 
has punardā́ya, karṇagṛ́hya, pādagṛ́hya, hastagṛ́hya, araṁkṛ́tya, akkhalīkṛ́tya,
mithaspṛ́dhya; AV. has further namaskṛ́tya.
991. The suffix ा tvā has the accent. It is usually added directly to the root, hut often also
with interposition of the auxiliary vowel इ i — with regard to which, as well as to the form of
the root before it, the formation nearly agrees with that of the participle in त ta (952 ff.).
a. Examples of the general accordance of passive participle, infinitive, and gerund in regard
to the use of i were given above, 968 a; farther specifications are called for, as follows:
b. The quotable roots in variable ṛ (242) change it to īr: thus, tīrtvā́, stīrtvā́ (also stṛtvā́); and
car makes also cīrtvā (like cīrṇa); — roots in ā show in general the same weakening as in the
participle; but from dhā put is quotable only dhitvā́, from mā measure mitvā́ and mītvā, from
dā give only dattvā́, from chā chāyitvā; — of roots in am, kram and bhram and yam make
forms both with and without i (as in the infinitive), but ram has ratvā́ and raṁtvā, and dam
and vam make damitvā and vamitvā.
c. The auxiliary vowel is taken by roots gras, muṣ, çap, and çās (çāsitvā) (whose participles
have both forms); also by cāy, nṛt (nartitvā), lag, and svaj (against analogy of pple); and çuc
makes çocitvā. On the other hand, from ruj (rugṇa) and vraçc (vṛkṇa) come ruktvā́ and vṛṣṭvā́.
And both forms are made (as also in infinitive or participle) from car, vas dwell (uṣṭvā, uṣitvā́),
nī (nītvā́, nayitvā), and mṛj (mṛṣṭvā́, mārjitvā).
d. While the formation is in general one requiring, like the passive participle (e. g. uptvā,
like uptá; uditvā́, like uditá), a weak or weakened root, there are some cases in which it is
made from a strong or strengthened root-form. Thus (besides the instances already given:
chāyitvā, raṁtvā, çāsitvā, cāyitvā, çocitvā, nayitvā, mārjitvā ), we find charditvā (Āpast.), daṅṣṭvā,
and spharitvā, and, from a number of roots, a second strong form beside the more regular weak
one: 
namely, an̄ktvā, bhan̄ktvā, bhun̄ktvā, syanttvā  
(beside aktvā́ 
etc.); cayitvā, smayitvā,
smaritvā (beside citvā́ etc.); roditvā (beside ruditvā), and siñcitvā (beside siktvā). The last
shows the influence of the present-stem; as do also mārjitvā (above) and jighritvā (√ghrft). The
form ṣṭhutvā (Āpast.) is doubtless a false reading, for ṣṭhyūtvā.
992. The suffix य ya is added directly to the root, which is accented, but has its weak form.
A root ending

in a short vowel takes  tya instead of य ya: thus, िज -jítya, ु -stútya,  -kṛ́tya.
a. Roots in variable ṛ (242) change that vowel to īr or ūr: thus, kīrya, gī́rya, tīrya (and
tū́rya), dī́rya, pūrya, çī́rya, stī́rya  (also stṛtya); — roots in ā have for the most part - āya; but dhā
suck makes dhīya, and double forms are found from gā sing (gāya, gī́ya), pā drink (pā́ya, pīya),
dā give (dā́ya, dádya) , dā divide (dā́ya, ditya) , mā measure, exchange (mā́ya, mítya) , sā bind
(sā́ya, sya) ; lī cling has lā́ya or līya, as if an ā-verb; and khan and dham make khāya and
dhmā́ya, from their ā-forms; — the roots in an and am making their participle in ata (954 d)
make the gerund in atya, but also later in anya, amya (e. g. gátya, gamya; hátya, hanya; but
tan makes as second form tāya, and from ram only ramya is quotable); — the roots in īv add
ya to their īv-form: thus, ṣṭhīvya, sī́vya; — a few roots in i and u add ya to the lengthened
vowel besides adding tya: thus, i go (īya, ítya; also ayya), ci gather (cīya, cítya), and plu, yu
unite, su, stu (plū́ya, plutya, etc.); while kṣi destroy has only kṣī́ya.
b. This gerund, though accented on the root-syllable, is generally a weakening formation:
thus are made, without a strengthening nasal found in some other forms, ácya, ájya, idhya,
údya, ubhya, grathya, tácya, daçya, bádhya, bhajya, lípya, lúpya, vlágya, çrabhya, sajya, skábhya,
stábhya, syadya, svajya; with weakening of other kinds, gṛ́hya and gṛ́bhya, pṛcchya, úcya, udya,
úpya, úṣya (vas dwell), úhya, vidhya, vī́ya, vṛçcya, spṛ́dhya, hū́ya ; — but from a number of roots
are made both a stronger and a weaker form: thus, manthya and máthya, mārjya and mṛ́jya,
rundhya and rúdhya, çaṅsya and çásya, çāsya and çiṣya, skándya and skádya, sráṅsya and
srasya; — and only strong forms are found from roots arc, av, cāy, çī (çayya), as well as from
certain roots with a constant nasal: e. g. uñch, kamp, nand, lamb, çan̄k ; isolated cases are oṣya
(√uṣ burn), prothya (also prúthya).
c. Other special cases are úhya and ūhya (√ūh remove), gurya and gū́rya, gúhya and gūhya,
rúhya and rūhya, bhramya and bhrāmya, áyya (beside ítya, īya) , ghrāya and jighrya; and
ūrṇutya (beside vṛ́tya).
993. The older language has the same two gerund formations, having the same distinction,
and used in the same way.
a. In RV., however, the final of ya is in the great majority of instances (fully two thirds)
long (as if the instrumental ending of a derivative noun in i or ti). In AV., long ā appears only
once in a RV. passage.
b. Instead of tvā alone, the Veda has three forms of the suffix, namely tvā́, tvā́ya, and tvī́.
Of these three, tvī́ is decidedly the commonest in RV. (thirty-five occurrences, against twenty-
one of tvā); but it is un-

known in AV., and very rare elsewhere in the older language; tvā́ya is found nine times in RV.
(only once outside the tenth Book), twice in AV., and but half-a-dozen times elsewhere (in ÇB.,
once from a causative stem: spāçayitvā́ya). The historical relation of the three forms is obscure.
c. Two other gerund suffixes, tvānam and tvīnam. are mentioned by the grammarians as of
Vedic use, but they have nowhere been found to occur.
994. The use of this gerund, though not changing in its character, becomes much more
frequent, and even excessive, in the later language.
a. Thus, in the Nala and Bhagavad-Gītā, which have only one tenth as many verb-forms as
RV., there are more than three times as many examples of the gerund as in the latter.
b. In general, the gerund is an adjunct to the subject of a sentence, and expresses an act or
condition belonging to the subject: thus, vajreṇa hatvā́ nír apáḥ sasarja  (RV.) smiting with his
thunderbolt, he poured forth the waters; pītvī́ sómasya vāvṛdhe (RV.) having drunk of the soma,
he waxed strong; tē yajñásya rásaṁ dhītvā́ vidúhya yajñáṁ yūpéna yopayitvā́ tirò ‘bhavan  (ÇB.)
having sucked out the sap of the offering, having milked the offering dry, having blocked it with
the sacrificial post, they disappeared; çrutvāi ’va cā ’bruvan (MBh.) and having heard, they said;
taṁ ca dūre dṛṣṭvā gardabhī ’yam iti matvā dhāvitaḥ (H.) and having seen him in the distance,
thinking 'it is a she-ass', he ran.
c. But if the logical subject, the real agent, is put by the construction of the sentence in a
dependent case, it is still qualified by the gerund: thus, stríyaṁ dṛṣṭvā́ya kitaváṁ tatāpa  (RV.) it
distresses the gambler (i. e. the gambler is distressed) at seeing a woman; táṁ hāi ’naṁ dṛṣṭvā́
bhī́r viveda (ÇB.) fear came upon him (i. e. he was afraid) when he saw him; vidhāya proṣite
vṛttim (M.) when he stays away after providing for her support; kiṁ nu me syād idaṁ kṛtvā
(MBh.) what, I wonder, would happen to me if I did this ; — and especially, when a passive
form is given to the sentence, the gerund qualifies the agent in the instrumental case (282 a):
thus, tataḥ çabdād abhijñāya sa vyāghreṇa hataḥ (H.) thereupon he was slain by the tiger, who
recognized him by his voice; tvayā sa rājā çakuntalām puraskṛtya vaktavyaḥ (Ç.) presenting
Çakuntalā, thou must say to the king; haṅsānāṁ vacanaṁ çrutvā yathā me (gen. for instr.)
nāiṣadho vṛtaḥ (MBh.) as the Nishadhan was chosen by me on hearing the words of the swans :
this construction is extremely common in much of the later Sanskrit.
d. Occasionally, the gerund qualifies an agent, especially an indefinite one, that is
unexpressed: thus, tadā ’trāi ’va paktvā khāditavyaḥ (H.) then he shall be eaten [by us] cooking
him on the spot; yad anyasya parijñāya punar anyasya dīyate  (M.) that, after being promised
(lit. when one has promised her) to one, she is given again to another ; sucintya co ’ktaṁ
suvicārya yat kṛtam (H.) what one says after mature thought,

and does after full deliberation. Hence, still more elliptically, after alam: thus, alaṁ vicārya (Ç.)
enough of hesitation; tad alaṁ te vanaṁ gatvā  (R.) so have done with going to the forest .
e. Other less regular constructions are met with, especially in the older language: thus, in
the manner of a participle with man and the like (268 a), as táṁ hiṅsitvè ’va mene  (ÇB.) he
thought he had hurt him; tā adbhir abhiṣicya nijāsyāi ’vā ’manyata (AB.) having sprinkled them
with water, he believed himself to have exhausted them; — in the manner of a participle
forming a continuous tense with √i (1075 a), as indram evāi ’tāir ārabhya yanti  (AB.) by means
of them they keep taking hold of Indra; — as qualifying a subordinate member of the sentence,
a s puroḍā́çam evá kūrmám bhūtvā́ sárpantam  (ÇB.) to the sacrificial cake creeping about,
having become a tortoise; ayodhyām . . . saphenām sasvanām bhūtvā jalormim iva  (R.) into
Ayodhyā, like a surge that had been foamy and roaring; — even absolutely, as ātithyéna vāí
devā́ iṣṭvā́ tā́nt samád avindat (ÇB.) when the gods had sacrificed with the guest-offering, strife
befel them.
f. As in the two examples before the last, a predicate word with bhūtvā is put in the same
case with the subject: thus, further, tád iyám evāì ’tád bhūtvā́ yajati  (ÇB.) so having thus
become this earth he makes offering; yena vāmanenā ’pi bhūtvā (Vet.) by whom, even when he
had become a dwarf. The construction is a rare one.
g. A number of gerunds have their meaning attenuated sometimes to the semblance of a
preposition or adverb: such are adhikṛtya making a subject of , i. e. respecting, of; ādāya,
upāgṛhya taking, i. e. with; uddiçya pointing toward, i. e. at; āsādya, arriving at, i. e. along, by;
ārabhya beginning, i.e. from; sambhūya being with, i. e. with; saṁhatya striking together, i. e.
in unison; prasahya using force, i. e. violently; tyaktvā, parityajya, muktvā, vihāya, uddhṛtya,
varjayitvā leaving out etc., i. e. excepting, without; and others. Examples are: çakuntalām
adhikṛtya bravīmi (Ç.) I am speaking of Çakuntalā ; tam uddiçya kṣiptalaguḍaḥ (H.) having
thrown the cudgel at him; nimittaṁ kiṁcid āsādya (H.) for some reason or other.
h. The gerund is in the later language sometimes found in composition, as if a noun-stem:
e. g. prasahyaharaṇa taking with violence ; pretyabhāva existence after death; vibhajyapāṭha
separate enunciation; sambhūyagamana going together. It is also often repeated (1260), in a
distributive sense: e. g. sá vāí sammṛ́jya-sammṛjya pratápya-pratapya prá yacchati  (ÇB.) in each
case, after wiping and warming them, he hands them over; gṛhītvā-gṛhītvā (KÇS.) at each
taking; unnamyo’nnamya (Pañc.) every time that they arise.
Adverbial Gerund in am.
995. The accusative of a derivative nomen actionis 
in a, used adverbially, assumes
sometimes a value and construction so accord-

ant with that of the usual gerund that it cannot well be called by a different name.
a. No example of a peculiar gerundial construction with such a form occurs either in RV. or
AV., although a dozen adverbial accusatives are to be classed as representing the formation:
thus, abhyākrā́mam, pratán̄kam, praṇódam, nilā́yam, abhiskándam, etc. This gerund is found
especially in the Brāhmaṇas and Sūtras, where it is not rare; in the epics it is extremely
infrequent; later, also, it occurs very sparingly.
b. A final vowel has vṛddhi-strengthening before the suffix: thus, nāyam, çrāvam, kāram;
final ā adds y: thus, khyāyam, yāyam; a medial vowel has guṇa (if capable of it: 240): thus,
kṣepam, kroçam, vartam 
(but īkṣam, pūram); a medial a before a single consonant is
lengthened: thus, krāmam, cāram, grāham, svādam (but grantham, lambham). The accent is on
the radical syllable. No uncompounded examples are found in the older language, and
extremely few in the later.
c. Examples are: kā́maṁ vā́ imā́ny án̄gāni vyatyā́saṁ çete  (ÇB.) he lies changing the position
of these limbs at pleasure; úttarām-uttarāṁ çā́khāṁ samālámbhaṁ róhet  (ÇB.) he would climb,
taking hold of a higher and ever a higher limb; aparī́ṣu mahānāgám ivā ’bhisaṁsā́raṁ
didṛkṣitā́raḥ (ÇB.) hereafter, running together as it were about a great snake, they will wish to
see him; nā́māny āsām etā́ni nāmagrā́ham (ÇB.) with separate naming of these their names ; yó
viparyā́sam avagū́hati (ÇB.) whoever buries it upside down ; bāhūtkṣepaṁ kranditum pravṛttā
(Ç.) she proceeded to cry, throwing up her arms  (with arm-tossing); navacūtapallavāni darçaṁ-
darçam madhukarāṇāṁ kvanitāni çrāvaṁ-çrāvam paribabhrāma (DKC.) he wandered about,
constantly seeing the young shoots of the mango, and hearing the humming of the bees.
Repeated forms, like those in the last example, are approved in the later language; they do not
occur earlier (but instead of them the repeated ordinary gerund: 994 h).
CHAPTER XIV.
DERIVATIVE OR SECONDARY CONJUGATION.
996. Secondary conjugations are those in which a whole system of forms, like that already
described as made from the simple root, is made, with greater or less completeness, from a
derivative conjugation-stem; and is also

usually connected with a certain definite modification of the original radical sense.
a. We have seen, indeed, that the tense-systems are also for the most part made from
derivative-stems; and even that, in some cases, such stems assume the appearance and value of
roots, and are made the basis of a complete conjugational system. Nor is there any distinct
division-line to be drawn between tense-systems and derivative conjugations; the latter are
present-systems which have been expanded into conjugations by the addition of other tenses,
and of participles, infinitives, and so on. In the earliest language, their forms outside of the
present-system are still quite rare, hardly more than sporadic; and even later they are — with
the exception of one or two formations which attain a comparative frequency — much less
common than the corresponding forms of primary conjugation.
997. The secondary conjugations are: I. Passive; II. Intensive; III. Desiderative; IV.
Causative; V. Denominative.
a. The passive is classed here as a secondary conjugation because of its analogy with the
others in respect to specific value, and freedom of formation, although it does not, like them,
make its forms outside the present system from its present-stem.
I. Passive.
998. The passive conjugation has been already in the main described. Thus, we have seen
that —
a. It has a special present-system, the stem of which is present only, and not made the
basis of any of the remaining forms: this stem is formed with the accented class-sign य yá, and
it takes (with exceptions: 774) the middle endings. This present-system is treated with the
others, above, 768 ff.
b. There is a special passive 3d sing. of the aorist, ending in इ i: it is treated above, 842 ff.
c. In the remaining tenses, the middle forms are used also in a passive sense.
d. But the passive use of middle forms is not common; it is oftenest met with in the perfect.
The participle to a great extent takes the place of a past passive tense, and the gerundive that
of a future. On the other

hand, in the oldest language (RV.), middle forms of other present-systems are in a considerable
number of cases employed with passive meaning.
e. According to the grammarians, there may be formed from some verbs, for passive use, a
special stem for the aorist and the two future systems, coinciding in form with the peculiar 3d
sing. aorist.
f. Thus, from √dā (aor. 3d sing. adāyi), beside ádāsi, dāsyé, dātā́he, also ádāyiṣi, dāyiṣyé,
dāyitā́he. The permission to make this doable formation extends to all roots ending in vowels,
and to grah, dṛç, and han . No such passive forms occur in the older language, and not half-a-
dozen are quotable from the later (we find adhāyiṣi and asthāyiṣi in DKC., and anāyiṣata in
Kuval.).
g. As to the alleged passive inflection of the periphrastic perfect, see below, 1072.
h. Besides the participle from the present tense-stem (771. 5), the passive has a past
participle in त ta (952), or न na (957), and future participles, or gerundives, of various
formation (961 ff.), made directly from the root.
999. As already pointed out (282 a), the language, especially later, has a decided
predilection for the passive form of the sentence. This is given in part by the use of finite
passive forms, but oftener by that of the passive participle and of the gerundive: the participle
being taken in part in a present sense, but more usually in a past (whether indefinite or
proximate past), and sometimes with a copula expressed, but much oftener without it; and the
gerundive representing either a pure future or one with the sense of necessity or duty added. A
further example is: tatrāi ’ko yuvā brāhmaṇo dṛṣṭaḥ: taṁ dṛṣṭvā kāmena pīḍitā saṁjātā: sakhyā
agre kathitam: sakhi puruṣo ‘yaṁ gṛhītvā mama mātuḥ samīpam ānetavyaḥ (Vet.) there she saw
a young Brahman; at sight of him she felt the pangs of love; she said to her friend: 'friend, you
must take and bring this man to my mother'. In some styles of later Sanskrit, the prevailing
expression of past time is by means of the passive participle (thus, in Vet., an extreme case,
more than nine tenths).
a. As in other languages, a 3d sing, passive is freely made from intransitive as well as
transitive verbs: thus, ihā ”gamyatām come hither; tvayā tatrāi ’va sthīyatām do you stand just
there; sarvāir jālam ādāyo ’ḍḍīyatām (H.) let all fly up with the net .
II. Intensive.
1000. The intensive (sometimes also called frequentative) is that one of the secondary
conjugations which is least removed from the analogy of formations already de-

scribed. It is, like the present-system of the second conjugation-class (642 ff.), the inflection of a
reduplicated stem, but of one that is peculiar in having a strengthened reduplication. It is
decidedly less extended beyond the limits of a present-system than any other of the derivative
conjugations.
a. The intensive conjugation signifies the repetition or the intensification of the action
expressed by the primary conjugation of a root.
1001. According to the grammarians, the intensive conjugation may be formed from nearly
all the roots in the language — the exceptions being roots of more than one syllable, those
conjugated only causatively (below, 1056), and in general those beginning with a vowel.
a. In fact, however, intensives in the later language are very rare, so rare that it is hard to
tell precisely what value is to be given to the rules of the native grammar respecting them. Nor
are they at all common earlier, except (comparatively) in the RV., which contains about six
sevenths of the whole number (rather over a hundred) quotable from Veda and Brāhmaṇa and
Sūtra-texts; AV. has less than half as many as RV., and many of them in RV. passages; from the
later language are quotable about twenty of these, and about forty more, but for the most part
only in an occurrence or two.
b. Hence, in the description to be given below, the actual aspect of the formation, as
exhibited in the older language, will be had primarily and especially in view; and the examples
will be of forms found there in use.
1002. The strong intensive reduplication is made in three different ways:
I. a. The reduplicating syllable is, as elsewhere, composed of a single consonant with
following vowel, and, so far as the consonant is concerned, follows the rules for present and
perfect reduplication (590); but the vowel is a heavy one, radical a and ṛ (or ar) being
reduplicated with ā, an i-vowel by e, and an u-vowel by o.
Examples are: vāvad, bābadh, çāçvas, rārandh; dādṛ, dādhṛ; cekit, tetij, nenī, vevlī; çoçuc,
popruth, coṣku, johū.
II. b. The reduplicating syllable has a final consonant, taken from the end of the root. With
an exception or two, this consonant is either r (or its substitute l) or a nasal.

Examples are: carcar, calcal, sarsṛ, marmṛj, jarhṛs ; can̄kram, jan̄ghan, taṅstan, dandaç
(√daṅç or daç), jañjabh (√jambh or jabh), tantas (√taṅs or tas), nannam (√nam), yaṁyam (√yam).
The nasal is assimilated to the initial consonant.
c. Only roots having a or ṛ as vowel make this form of reduplication, but with such roots it
is more common than either of the other forms.
d. Irregular formations of this class are: with a final other than r or n in the reduplication,
badbadh; with a final nasal in the reduplication which is not found in the root, jan̄gah (RV.),
jañjap (ÇB.; and jan̄gūyat PB. is perhaps from √gu; the later language has further dandah); with
an anomalous initial consonant in reduplication, jarbhur from √bhur (compare the Vedic perfect
jabhāra from √bhṛ, 789 b), galgal from √gal; with various treatment of an ṛ or ar-element,
dardar and dardir, carkar and carkir, tartar and tartur, carcar and carcur, jargur and jalgul.
e. The roots i and ṛ are the only ones with vowel initial forming an intensive stem: i makes
iyāy (? PU., once); ṛ makes the irregular alar or alṛ. As to the stem ī́ya, see below, 1021 b.
III. f. The reduplication is dissyllabic, an i-vowel being added after a final consonant of the
reduplicating syllable. This i-vowel is in the older language short before a double consonant,
and long before a single.
Examples are: ganīgam (but gánigmatam) , varīvṛt, vanīvāh, caniṣkad, saniṣvan; navīnu,
davidyut (and the participles dávidhvat but távītuat). A single exception as to the quantity of
the i is davidhāva.
g. This method of reduplication is followed in the older language by about thirty roots.
Thus, of roots having final or penultimate n (once m), and n in the reduplicating syllable, pan,
phan, san, svan, han; gam; krand, çcand, skand, syand; of roots having final or medial ṛ, and r
in the, reduplicating syllable, kṛ make, tṛ, bhṛ, vṛ, mṛj, mṛç, vṛj, vṛt, sṛp ; also mluc (malimluc);
— further, of roots assuming in the reduplication a n not found in the root, only vah (ÇB.: the
grammarians allow also kas, pat, pad; and panīpad is quotable later; and AÇS. has canīkhudat,
for which TB. reads kánīkhunat); finally, of roots having u or ū as radical vowel, with av before
the i-vowel, tu, dhū, nu, dyut.
h. In this class, the general rules as to the form of the reduplicating consonant (590) are
violated in the case of ghanīghan and bharībhṛ, and of ganīgam, karīkṛ (but the regular carīkṛ
also occurs), kanikrand, and kaniṣkand (but also caniṣkand occurs); also in kanīkhun.
i. The reversion to more original guttural form after the reduplication in cekit, and jan̄ghan
and ghanīghan, is in accordance with what takes place elsewhere (2161).

1003. The same root is allowed to form its intensive stem in more than one way.
Thus, in the older language, dādr and dardṛ; dādhṛ and dardhṛ; cācal and carcar (and
carcur); tartar (and tartur) and tarītṛ; jan̄gam and ganīgam; jan̄ghan and ghanīghan; pamphan
a n d panīphan; marmṛj and marīmṛj; marmṛç and marīmṛç; varvṛt 
and varīvṛt; jarbhṛ and
bharībhṛ; dodhū and davīdhū; nonu and navīnu; bābadh and badbadh.
1004. The model of normal intensive inflection is the present-system of the reduplicating
conjugation-class (642 ff.); and this is indeed to a considerable extent followed, in respect to
endings, strengthening of stem, and accent. But deviations from the model are not rare; and
the forms are in general of too infrequent occurrence to allow of satisfactory classification and
explanation.
a. The most marked irregularity is the frequent insertion of an ī between the stem and
ending. According to the grammarians, this is allowed in all the strong forms before an ending
beginning with a consonant; and before the ī a final vowel has guṇa-strengthening, but a medial
one remains unchanged.
Present-System.
1005. We will take up the parts of the present-system in their order, giving first what is
recognized as regular in the later language, and then showing how the formation appears in the
earlier texts. As most grammarians do not allow a middle inflection, and middle forms are few
even in the Veda, no attempt will be made to set up a paradigm for the middle voice.
1006. As example of inflection may be taken the root िव vid know, of which the intensive
stem is वेिव vevid, or, in strong forms, वेवे véved.
a. Neither from this nor from any other root are more than a few scattering forms actually
quotable.
1. Present Indicative.
s.
d.
p.
1
वेवेि, वेिवदीिम
vévedmi, vévidīmi
वेिवस्
vevidvás
वेिवस्
vevidmás

2
वेवेि, वेिवदीिष
vévetsi, vévidīṣi
वेिवस्
vevitthás
वेिव
vevitthá
3
वेवेि, वेिवदीित
vévetti, vévidīti
वेिवस्
vevittás
वेिवदित
vévidati
b. From √ hū, the singular forms with auxiliary vowel would be जोहवीिम jóhavīmi, जोहवीिष
jóhavīṣi, जोहवीित jóhavīti.
1007. a. The forms found in the older language agree in general with the paradigm.
Examples are: 1st sing., carkarmi, veveṣmi; 2d sing., alarṣi, dárdarṣi; 3d sing., álarti, dādharti,
veveti, nenekti, jan̄ghanti, kánikrantti, ganīgaṁti; 3d du., jarbhṛtás; 1st pl., nonumas; 2d pl.,
jāgratha; 3d pl., dādhrati, nānadati, bharibhrati, várvṛtati, dávidyutati, nénijati , and, irregularly,
veviṣanti; and, with the auxiliary vowel, jóhavīmi, cākaçīmi; cā́kaçīti, nónavīti, dardarīti,
jarbhurīti. No stem with dissyllabic reduplication takes the auxiliary ī in any of its forms.
b. A single dual form with ī and strong stem occurs: namely, tartarīthas.
c. The middle forms found to occur are: 1st sing., jóguve, nenije; 3d sing., nenikté, sarsṛte;
and, with irregular accent, tétikte, dédiṣṭe; with irregular loss of final radical nasal, nánnate;
with ending e instead of te, cékite, ján̄gahe, jóguve, yoyuve, bābadhe , and (with irregular
accent) badbadhé; 3d du., sarsrāte; 3d pl., dédiçate.
2. Present Subjunctive.
1008. a. Subjunctive forms with primary endings are extremely rare: there have been
noticed only jan̄ghánāni, jāgarāsi (AV.); and, in the middle, tantasāíte (3d du.).
b. Forms with secondary endings are more frequent: thus, 2d sing., jan̄ghanas, jalgulas; 3d
sing., jāgarat, cékitat, bobhavat, cárkṛṣat, ján̄ghanat, bárbṛhat, mármṛjat, mármṛçat, parpharat,
dardirat, caniṣkadat, davidyutat, saniṣvaṇat; 1st du., jan̄ghanāva; 1st pl., carkirāma, vevidāma;
3d pl., pā́patan, çóçucan, carkiran; and, with double mode-sign, cā́kaçān (AV.). Of the middle
are found only 3d persons plural: thus, ján̄ghananta, jarhṛṣanta, marmṛjanta, nonuvanta,
çoçucanta.
3. Present Optative.
1009. This mode would show the unstrengthened stem, with the usual endings (566),
accented. Thus:

s.
d.
p.
1
वेिवाम्
vevidyā́m
वेिवाव
vevidyā́va
वेिवाम
vevidyā́ma
etc.
etc.
etc.
a. The optative is represented by only an example or two in the older language: thus,
active, veviṣyāt (AV.), jāgṛyās (KB.), jāgriyāt (AB.), jāgṝyāma (VS. MS.; but jāgriyāma TS.); RV.
has only cākanyāt (pft.?); middle, nenijīta (K.).
4. Present Imperative.
1010. The regular forms of the imperative, including the usual subjunctive first persons,
would be as follows:
s.
d.
p.
1
वेिवदािन
vévidāni
वेिवदाव
vévidāva
वेिवदाम
vévidāma
2
वेिवि
veviddhí
वेिवम्
vevittám
वेिव
vevittá
3
वेिवु, वेिवदीतु
vévettu, vévidītu
वेिवाम्
vevittā́m
वेिवदतु
vévidatu
1011. a. Older imperative forms are less rare than optative. The first persons have been
given above (jānghánāni, the only accented example, does not correspond with the model, but is
in conformity with the subjunctive of the reduplicating present); the proper imperatives are: 2d
sing., dādṛhí, dardṛhi, carkṛdhi, jāgṛhi, nenigdhi, rāranddhí ; the ending tāt is found in carkṛtāt
and jāgṛtāt; and the latter (as was pointed out above, 571 b) is used in AV. as first person
sing.; barbṛhi shows an elsewhere unparalleled loss of h before the ending hi; 3d sing.,
dādhartu, veveṣṭu, dardartu, marmarttu; 2d du., jāgṛtam; 3d du., jāgṛtām; 2d pl., jāgṛtá;
can̄kramata (RV., once) has an anomalous union-vowel. In the middle voice is found only
nenikṣva (ÇB.).
b. Of imperative forms with auxiliary ī, RV. has none; AV. has vāvadītu and johavītu, and
such are sometimes found in the Brāhmaṇas; AV. has also, against rule, taṅstanīhi and
jan̄ghanīhi; VS. has cākaçīhi.
5. Present Participle.
1012. The intensive participles, both active and middle, are comparatively common in the
older language. They are formed and inflected like those of the reduplicating present, and have
the accent on the reduplicating syllable.

Examples are: active, cā́kaçat, nā́nadat, cékitat, mémyat, çóçucat, róruvat, dárdrat, mármṛjat,
ján̄ghanat, nánnamat, pánīphanat, kánīkradat, dávidyutat; — middle, bā́badhāna, mémyāna,
cékitāna, yóyuvāna, rórucāna, járbhurāṇa, sársrāṇa, jañjabhāna, nánnamāna, dándaçāna. No
middle participle shows the dissyllabic reduplication.
1013. a. On account of their accent, rārahāṇá, rārakṣāṇá, and jāhṛṣāṇá (beside járhṛṣāṇa)
are probably to be regarded as perfect participles, although no other perfect forms with heavy
reduplication from the same roots occur. The inference is, however, rendered uncertain by the
unmistakably intensive badbadhāná and marmṛjāná (beside mármṛjāna). As to çū́çucāna etc., see
806 a.
b. The RV. has once ján̄ghnatas, gen. sing., with root-vowel cast out; kánikrat appears to be
used once for kánikradat; if cākát is to be referred to √kā (Grassmann), it is the only example
of an intensive from a root in ā, and its accent is anomalous. Marmṛçantas (AB.) is perhaps a
false reading; but forms with the nasal irregularly retained are found repeatedly in the epics
and later: thus, lelihan, dedīpyantīm (MBh.), jājvalant (MBh. R.), sarīsṛpantāu (BhP.), rāraṭantī
(R.).
6. Imperfect.
1014. The imperfect is regularly inflected as follows:
s.
d.
p.
1
अवेिवदम्
ávevidam
अवेिव
ávevidva
अवेिव
ávevidma
2
अवेवेत्, अवेिवदीस्
ávevet, ávevidīs
अवेिवम्
ávevittam
अवेिव
ávevitta
3
अवेवेत्, अवेिवदीत्
ávevet, ávevidīt
अवेिवाम्
ávevittām
अवेिवस्
ávevidus
1015. The imperfect forms found in the earlier texts are not numerous. They are, including
those from which the augment is omitted, as follows: in active, 1st sing., acākaçam, dediçam;
2d sing., ajāgar, adardar, dárdar; 3d sing., adardar, adardhar, avarīvar, dardar, kániṣkan,
dávidyot, návīnot; 2d du., adardṛam; 1st pl., marmṛjmá; 3d pl., anannamus, adardirus, acarkṛṣus,
ájohavus, anonavus; and, with auxiliary ī, in 3d sing., avāvacīt, ávāvaçīt, ávāvarīt, áyoyavīt,
ároravīt, ájohavīt; and, irregularly, in 3d du., avāvaçītām. The middle forms are extremely few:
namely, 3d sing., ádediṣṭa, ánannata (with loss of the final radical in a weak form of root); 3d
pl. marmṛjata, and avāvaçanta (which, if it belongs here, shows a transfer to an a-stem).

1016. Derivative Middle Inflection. From every intensive stem, as above described, may be
formed in the present-system a further derivative conjugation which is formally identical with a
passive, being made by the accented sign य yá, along with middle endings only. It has not,
however, a passive value, but is in meaning and use indistinguishable from the simpler
conjugation.
a. A final vowel before this ya is treated as before the passive-sign ya (770).
b. The inflection is precisely like that of any other stem ending in a in the middle voice:
thus, from √mṛj, intensive stem marmṛj, is made the present indicative marmṛjyé, marmṛjyáse,
marmṛjyáte, etc.; optative marmṛjyéya, marmṛjyéthās, marmṛjyéta, etc.; imperative marmṛjyásva,
marmṛjyátām, etc.; participle marmṛjyámāna; imperfect ámarmṛjye, ámarmṛjyathās, ámarmṛjyata,
etc.; subjunctive forms do not occur.
c. In a very few sporadic cases, these yá-forms are given a passive value: thus,
jan̄ghanyamāna in MḍU.; bambhramyate, dādhmāyamāna, pepīyamāna in the later language. And
active participles (529 a) are not unknown: thus, dedīpyantīm (MBh.), dodhūyant (MBh. BhP.).
1017. This kind of intensive inflection is more common than the other in the later language;
in the earlier, it is comparatively rare.
a. In RV., yá-forms are made from eight roots, five of which have also forms of the simpler
conjugation; the AV. adds one more; the other earlier texts (so far as observed) about twenty
more, and half of them have likewise forms of the simpler conjugation. Thus: from √mṛj,
marmṛjyáte etc., and marīmṛjyeta; from √tṛ, tartūryante; from √car, carcūryámāṇa; from √nī,
nenīyéran, etc.; from √vī, vevīyate; from √rih, rerihyáte etc.; from vij, vevijyáte; from √sku,
coṣkūyáse etc.; from √diç, dediçyate; from √kāç, cākaçyáte etc.; from √vad, vāvadyámāna; from
√nam, nannamyadhvam; from √vah, vanīvāhyéta etc. (with lengthened root-vowel, elsewhere
unknown); from √krand, kanikradyámāna; from √vṛt, varīvartyámāna (ÇB.: should be varīvṛty-);
from √mṛç, amarīmṛçyanta (ÇB.? the text reads amarīmṛtsyanta); from √yup, yoyupyánte etc.;
from √nud, anonudyanta; from √vlī, avevlīyanta; from √jabh, jañjabhyáte etc.; from √jap,
jañjapyámāna; and so on.

Perfect.
1018. The grammarians are at variance as to whether a perfect may be formed directly
from the intensive stem, or whether only a periphrastic perfect (below, 1070 ff.) is to be
admitted.
a. No example of an intensive periphrastic perfect has anywhere come to light (except from
jāgṛ: 1020 a). A few unmistakable perfect forms are made from the intensively reduplicated root
in RV.: namely, davidhāva and nónāva, 3d sing., and nonuvus, 3d pl.; and there occur further
dodrāva (TS.), yoyāva and lelā́ya (MS.), and leláya (? ÇB.), all used in the sense of presents. To
them may be added jāgara 1st sing. and jāgā́ra 3d sing.: but as to these, see below, 1020 a.
Aorist, Future, etc.
1019. As to the remaining parts of a full verbal conjugation, also, the grammarians are not
agreed (occurrences of such forms, apparently, being too rare to afford even them any basis for
rules); in general, it is allowed to treat the intensive stem further as a root in filling up the
scheme of forms, using always the auxiliary vowel इ i where it is ever used in the simple
conjugation.
a. Thus, from √vid, intensive stem vevid, would be made the aorist avevidiṣam with
precative vevidyāsam, 
the 
futures vevidiṣyāmi 
and veviditāsmi, 
the 
participles vevidita,
veviditavya, etc., the infinitive veviditum, and the gerunds veviditvā and -vevidya. And, where
the intensive conjugation is the derivative middle one, the aorist and futures would take the
corresponding middle form.
b. Of all this, in the ancient language, there is hardly a trace. The RV. has cárkṛṣe, 3d sing.
mid., of a formation like hiṣe and stuṣé (894 d), and the gerundives vitantasā́yya, and
marmṛjénya and vāvṛdhénya; and ÇB. has the participle vanīvāhitá, and the infinitive dédīyitavāí.
As to jāgariṣyánt and jāgaritá, see the next paragraph.
1020. There are systems of inflection of certain roots, the intensive character of which is
questioned or questionable. Thus:
a. The root gṛ (or gar) wake has from the first no present-system save one with intensive
reduplication; and its intensive stem, jāgṛ, begins early to assume the value of a root, and form
a completer conjugation; while by the grammarians this stem is reckoned as if simple and
belonging to the root-class, and is inflected throughout accordingly. Those of its forms which
occur in the older language have been given along with

the other intensives above. They are, for the present-system, the same with those acknowledged
as regular later. The older perfect is like the other intensive perfects found in RV.: namely,
jāgara etc., with the participle jāgṛvā́ṅs; and a future jāgariṣyá-, a passive participle jāgaritá,
and a gerundive jāgaritavyà, are met with in the Brāhmaṇas. The old aorist (RV.) is the usual
reduplicated or so-called causative aorist: thus, ájīgar. The grammarians give it in the later
language a perfect with additional reduplication, jajāgāra etc., an iṣ-aorist, ajāgariṣam, with
precative jāgaryāsam, and everything else that is needed to make up a complete conjugation.
The perf. jajāgāra is quotable from the epics and later, as also the periphrastic jāgarām āsa.
And MBh. has the mutilated jāgṛmi, and also a-forms, as jāgarati and jāgramāṇa.
1021. a. The stem irajya (active only) regulate, from which a number of forms are made in
RV., has been viewed as an intensive from √raj or ṛj. It lacks, however, any analogy with the
intensive formation. The same is true of iradh propitiate 
(only iradhanta 
and irádhyāi,
apparently for iradhadhyāi).
b. The middle stem ī́ya, not infrequent in the oldest language, is often called an intensive of
√i go, but without any propriety, as it has no analogy of form whatever with an intensive. The
isolated 1st pl. īmahe, common in RV., is of questionable character.
1022. The root lī totter, with constant intensive reduplication, lelī, is quite irregular in
inflection and accent: thus, pres., lelā́yati and lelāyate, pples lelāyántī and leláyatas (gen. sing.)
and lelāyamāna, impf. alelāyat and alelet and alelīyata, perf. lelāya and leláya (?).
1023. The RV. anomalous form dart (or dard), 2d and 3d sing. from √dṛ or dar, is doubtfully
referred to the intensive, as if abbreviated from dardar. RV. has once avarīvus (or -vur) where
the sense requires a form from √vṛt, as avarīvṛtus. The form rarāṇátā (RV., once) seems corrupt.
1024. A marked intensive or frequentative meaning is not always easily to be traced in the
forms classed as intensive; and in some of them it is quite effaced. Thus, the roots cit, nij, viṣ
use their intensive present-system as if it were an ordinary conjugation-class; nor is it otherwise
with gṛ (jāgṛ). The grammarians reckon the inflection of nij and viṣ as belonging to the
reduplicating present-system, with irregularly strengthened reduplication; and they treat in the
same way vic and vij; jāgṛ, as we have seen, they account a simple root.
a. Also daridrā, intensive of √drā run, is made by the grammarians a simple root, and
furnished with a complete set of conjugational forms: as dadaridrāu; adaridrāsīt, etc. etc. It
does not occur in the older language (unless dáridrat TS., for which VS. MS. read dáridra). The
so-called root vevī flutter is a pure intensive.

1025. It is allowed by the grammarians to make from the intensive stem also a passive,
desiderative, causative, and so on: thus, from vevid, pass. vevidyé; desid. vévidiṣāmi; caus.
vevidáyāmi; desid. of causative, vévidayiṣāmi. But such formations are excessively rare; quotable
are varīvarjáyantī AV., jāgaráyant TB. etc.; dādhārayati JB., dandaçayitvā DKC.
III. Desiderative.
1026. By the desiderative conjugation is signified a desire for the action or condition
denoted by the simple root: thus, िपबािम píbāmi I drink, desid. िपपासािम pípāsāmi I wish to drink;
जीवािम jī́vāmi I live, desid. िजजीिवषािम jíjīviṣāmi I desire to live. Such a conjugation is allowed to
be formed from any simple root in the language, and also from any causative stem.
a. The desiderative conjugation, although its forms outside the present-system are extremely
rare in the oldest language, is earlier and more fully expanded into a whole verbal system than
the intensive. Its forms are also of increasing frequency: much fewer than the intensives in RV.,
more numerous in the Brāhmaṇas and later; not one third of the whole number of roots (about
a hundred) noted as having a desiderative conjugation in Veda and Brāhmaṇa have such in RV.
1027. The desiderative stem is formed from the simple root by the addition of two
characteristics. 1. a reduplication, which always has the accent; 2. an appended स sa — which,
however (like the tense-signs of aorist and future), sometimes takes before it the auxiliary
vowel इ i, becoming इष iṣa.
a. A few instances in the concluding part of ÇB. in which the accent is otherwise laid —
thus, tiṣṭhā́set, yiyāsántam, vividiṣánti, īpsántas — must probably be regarded as errors.
1028. The root in general remains unchanged; but with the following exceptions:
a. A final i or u is lengthened before sa: thus, cikṣīṣa, cikīṣa, jigīṣa; çuçrūṣa, juhūṣa,
cukṣūṣa.
b. A final ṛ becomes īr or ūr before sa: thus, cikīrṣa, titīrṣa (also irregularly tūtūrṣa RV.),
didhīrṣa, sisīrṣa, tistīrṣa 
(also tustūrṣa) , jihīrṣa; bubhūrṣa, mumūrṣa (the only examples
quotable).

c. Before iṣa, a final i- or u- or ṛ-vowel necessarily, and a penultimate i or u or ṛ optionally,
have the guṇa-strengthening; no examples are quotable from the older texts; later occur
çiçayiṣa, çiçariṣa; cikartiṣa, ninartiṣa, mimardiṣa, vivarṣiṣa, çuçobhiṣa; but rurudiṣa.
More special exceptions are:
d. A few roots in ā weaken this vowel to ī or even i: thus, jigīṣa from √gā go; pipīṣa (beside
pipāsa) from √pā drink, jihīṣa (AV.) from √hā remove (jihīte: 664); didhiṣa (beside dhitsa) from
√dhā.
e. A few roots in an or am lengthen the vowel: thus, jigāṅsa (beside jigamiṣa) from √gam;
jighāṅsa from √han; mīmāṅsa from √man; and titāṅsa from √tan.
f. Reversion to guttural form of an initial after the reduplication is seen in cikīṣa from √ci,
cikitsa from √cit, jigīṣa from √ji, jighāṅsa from √han; and √hi is said to make jighīṣa (no
occurrence).
g. The roots van and san make vivāsa and siṣāsa, from the root-forms vā and sā.
h. The root jīv forms jujyūṣa (ÇB.: jijīviṣa, VS.); and the other roots in īv (765) are required
to make the same change before sa, and to have guṇa before iṣa: thus, susyūṣa or siseviṣa
from √sīv. Svap forms suṣupsa. Dhūrv forms dudhūrṣa.
i. Initial s is usually left unchanged to ṣ after the reduplication when the desiderative sign
h a s ṣ (184e): thus, sisan̄kṣa (ÇB.: √sañj), 
and susyūṣa 
and sisaniṣa, according to the
grammarians; but tuṣṭūṣa is met with.
j. Further may be mentioned as prescribed by the grammarians: ninan̄kṣa (or ninaçiṣa) from
√nāç be lost; miman̄kṣa from √majj (occurs in miman̄kṣu); mimārjiṣa (or mimṛkṣa) from √mṛj.
1029. The consonant of the reduplication follows the general rules (590); the vowel is इ i if
the root has an a-vowel, or ऋ ṛ, or an i- vowel; it is उ u if the root has an u-vowel. But:
a. A few roots have a long vowel in the reduplicating syllable: thus, bībhatsa from √badh or
bādh; mīmaṅsa from √man; and tūtūrṣa (RV.) from √tur; dadhiṣu (AV.) and dadan̄kṣu (C.) are
probably false forms.
b. From √aç is made (ÇB.) açiçiṣa, and from √edh (VS.) edidhiṣa (with a mode of
reduplication like that followed sometimes in the reduplicating aorist: 862). In the older
language, these are the only roots with initial vowel which form a desiderative stem, except āp
and ṛdh, which have abbreviated stems: see the next paragraph. In the later language occur
further eṣiṣiṣa (√iṣ seek) and īcikṣiṣa (√īkṣ); and the grammarians add others, as arjihiṣa (√arh),
undidiṣa (√und), ardidhiṣa (√ṛdh).

c. RV. has the stems ínakṣa and íyakṣa, regarded as desideratives from √√naç attain and
yaj, with mutilated reduplication.
1030. A number of roots, including some of very common use, form an abbreviated stem
apparently by a contraction of reduplication and root together into one syllable: thus, ई īpsa
from √आप् āp; िद ditsa from √दा dā.
a. Such abbreviated stems are found in the older language as follows: dhitsa (beside
didhiṣa) from √dhā; ditsa (beside didāsa) from √dā; dipsa (dhīpsa JB.) from √dabh; çikṣa from
√çak; sīkṣa from √sah: these are found in RV.; in AV. are added īpsa from √āp (RV. has apsa
once), and īrtsa from √ṛdh; the other texts furnish lipsa (ÇB.) or līpsa (TB.) from √labh, ripsa
(GB.) from √rabh, pitsa (ÇB.) from √pad, and dhīkṣa (ÇB.) from √dah (not √dih, since no roots
with i as medial vowel show the contracted form). In the later language are further found pitsa
from √pat also, jñīpsa from the causative quasi-root jñap (below, 1042 j), and the anomalous
mitsa from √mā measure (allowed also from roots mi and mī); and the grammarians give ritsa
from √rādh. Also mokṣa is (very questionably) viewed as a desiderative stem from √muc.
1031. The use of the auxiliary vowel इ i is quite rare in the early language, but more
common later; and it is allowed or prescribed by the grammarians in many stems which have
not been found in actual use.
a. It is declared to follow in general, though not without exceptions, necessary or optional,
the analogy of the futures (934, 943 a).
b. No example of the use of i is found in RV., and only one each in AV. ( pipatiṣa), VS.
(jijīviṣa), and TS. (jigamiṣa). The other examples noted in the early texts are açiçiṣa, cikramiṣa,
jigrahīṣa (with ī for i, as elsewhere in this root), cicariṣa, edidhiṣa, jijaniṣa, didīkṣiṣa, bibādhiṣa,
ruruciṣa, vivadiṣa, vividiṣa, çiçāsiṣa, tiṣṭighiṣa, jihiṅsiṣa: most of them are found only in ÇB.
Stems also without the auxiliary vowel are made from roots gam, grab, car, jīv, pat, bādh, vid .
1032. Inflection: Present-System. The desiderative stem is conjugated in the present-system
with perfect regularity, like other a-stems (733 a), in both voices, in all the modes (including, in
the older language, the subjunctive), and with participles and imperfect. It will be sufficient to
give here the first persons only. We may take

as active model ई īpsa seek to obtain, from √आप् āp obtain; as middle, ितित titikṣa endure,
from √ितज् tij be sharp (see below, 1040).
1. Present Indicative.
active.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
s.
d.
p.
1
ईािम
ī́psāmi
ईावस्
ī́psāvas
ईामस्
ī́psāmas
ितिते
títikṣe
ितितावहे
títikṣāvahe
ितितामहे
títikṣāmahe
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
2. Present Subjunctive.
1 ईािन
ī́psāni
ईाव
ī́psāva
ईाम
ī́psāma
ितितै
títikṣāi
ितितावहै
títikṣāvahāi
ितितामहै
títikṣāmahāi
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
3. Present Optative.
1 ईेयम्
ī́pseyam
ईेव
ī́pseva
ईेम
ī́psema
ितितेय
títikṣeya
ितितेविह
títikṣevahi
ितितेमिह
títikṣemahi
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
4. Present Imperative.
2 ई
ī́psa
ईतम्
ī́psatam
ईत
ī́psata
ितित
títikasva
ितितेथाम्
títiksetham
ितितम्
títiksadhvam
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
5. Present Participle.
ई् ī́psant (f.ईी ī́psantī)
ितितम् títikṣadhvam
6. Imperfect.
1 ऐम्
āípsam
ऐाव
āípsāva
ऐाम
āípsāma
अितिते átitikṣe
अितिताविह
átitikṣāvahi
अितितामिह
átitikṣāmahi
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
a. There are almost no irregularities of inflection to be reported from the older language.
No 1st pl. in masi, or 2d pl. in thana or tana, is met with; of the impv. in tāt, only īpsatāt. The
quotable subjunctive forms are those in sāni, sāt and sat, sān, and santa. KBU. has jijñāsīta (cf.
738 b). But the fem. pple síṣāsatī (instead of siṣāsantī) occurs once or twice in the older texts;
and RV. has dídhiṣāṇa.
b. In the epics and later are found sporadic forms of the non-a--

conjugation: thus, sisṛkṣmas (BhP.), titikṣmahe and bubhūṣate 3d pl. (MBb.); and the fem.
participles lipsatī and cikīrṣatī (MBh.: against 449 b). The anomalous jighīṅsīyāt occurs also in
MBh. and Vas.
1033. a. Desiderative forms outside the present-system are extremely rare in the oldest
language. The RV. has only perfect forms from a stem mimikṣ — thus, mimikṣáthus,
mimikṣátus, mimikṣús; mimikṣe, mimikṣire — along with the present forms mimikṣati, mimikṣa
etc., mimikṣant (pple): they show that mimikṣ or mikṣ has taken on the character of an
independent root. In AV. are found two aorist forms, īrtsīs and acikitsīs, and a participle or two
from mīmāṅsa (see below, 1037 a, 1030 a) — all of them from stems which have lost their
distinct desiderative meaning, and come to bear an independent value. The forms noted from
the other earlier texts will be given in full below.
b. In the later language, a complete system of verbal forms is allowed to be made in the
desiderative conjugation, the desiderative stem, less its final vowel, being treated as a root.
Thus:
1034. Perfect. The desiderative perfect is the periphrastic (1070 ff.).
a. Thus, īpsāṁ cakāra etc.; titikṣāṁ cakre etc. Such forms are made in ÇB. from √√kram,
dhūrv, bādh, ruh; and in ChU. from man.
b. Apparent perfect forms of the ordinary kind made from mimikṣ in RV. have been noticed
in the preceding paragraph. And AB. (viii. 21. 10) has once didāsitha thou hast desired to give.
1035. Aorist. The aorist is of the iṣ-form: thus, ऐिषम् āípsiṣam, अितितििष átitikṣiṣi.
a. The AY. has acikitsīs, and īrtsīs (augmentless, with mā́ prohibitive: 579). TB. has āipsīt;
ÇB. āírtsīt, ācikīrṣis and ajighāṅsīs, and amīmāṅsiṣṭhās; KB. jijñāsiṣi; JUB. āipsiṣma; and AA.
adhitsiṣam. No examples have been found in the later language.
b. A precative is also allowed — thus, īpsyāsam, titikṣiṣīya; but it never occurs.
1036. Futures. The futures are made with the auxiliary vowel इ i: thus, ईिािम īpsiṣyā́mi
and ईिताि īpsitā́smi; ितितिे titikṣiṣyé and ितितिताहे titkṣitā́he.
a. The ÇB. has titikṣiṣyate and didṛkṣitā́ras. Such forms as jijñāsyāmas (MBh.), didhakṣyāmi
(R.), and mīmāṅsyant (GGS.) are doubtless presents, with - sya- blunderingly for -sa-.

1037. Verbal Nouns and Adjectives. These too are made with the auxiliary vowel इ i, in all
cases where that vowel is ever taken.
a. In the older language have been noted: participle in ta, mīmāṅsitá (AV., GB.), jijyūṣita
(AB.), çuçrūṣitá and dhīkṣitá (ÇB.); — gerundive in tavya, līpsitavya (AB.), didhyāsitavyá (ÇB.);
in ya, jijñāsyà (ÇB.); — gerund in tvā, mīmāṅsitvā (K.).
1038. Of other declinable stems derived from the desiderative stem, by far the most
common are the adjective in ú — e. g. titikṣu, dipsú, bībhatsú, siṣāsú (RV. once didṛ́kṣu) — and
the abstract noun in ā́ — e. g. īpsā, bībhatsā́, mīmāṅsā́, çuçrūṣā́  — both of which are made with
increasing freedom from an early epoch of the language: especially the former, which has the
value and construction (271 a) of a present participle. A few adjectives in enya (having a
gerundive character: 966 b) occur in the earlier language: thus, didṛkṣéṇya (RV.), çuçrūṣéṇya
(TS.), ninīṣeṇya (PB.), jijñāsenya (AB.), and, with irregular reduplication (apparently) papṛkṣéṇya
(RV.), dadhiṣeṇya (JB.); and didṛkṣéya (RV.) is a similar formation. RV. has also siṣāsáni and
rurukṣáṇi, and siṣāsátu (?). In the later language, besides some of the formations already
instanced (those in u and ā, and in sya and sitavya), are found a few derivatives in aka, as
cikitsaka, bubhūṣaka; in ana, as jijñāsana, didhyāsana; and, very rarely, in anīya (cikitsanīya)
and tṛ (çuçrūṣitṛ); further, secondary derivatives (doubtless) in in from the noun in ā, as īpsin,
jigīṣin (one or two of these occur in the older language). And of an adjective in a we have an
example in bībhatsá (B.S., and later), and perhaps in avalipsa (AVP.); such words as ajugupsa,
duçcikitsa, are rather to be understood as possessive compounds with the noun in ā. As to
noun-stems in is, see 392 d.
1039. Derivative or Tertiary Conjugations. A passive is allowed to be made, by adding the
passive-sign य yá to the desiderative root (or stem without final a): thus, ईते īpsyáte it is
desired to be obtained; — and a causative, by adding in like manner the causative-sign अय áya
(1041): thus, ईयािम īpsáyāmi I cause to desire obtainment .
a. Of these formations in the older language are found mīmāṅsyámāna (doubtless to be read
for -sámāna, AV.), lipsyámāna (ÇB.), and rurutsyamāna (K.). Half-a-dozen such passives are
quotable later, and one or two causatives: e. g. cikitsyate, vivakṣyate, jijñāsyate; cikīrṣayant,
cikitsayiṣyati.
b. For the desiderative conjugation formed on causative stems, which is found as early as
the Brāhmaṇas, see below, 1052b.

1040. Some stems which are desiderative in form have lost the peculiarity of desiderative
meaning, and assumed the value of independent roots: examples are cikits, cure, jugups,
despise, titikṣ, endure, bībhats, abhor, mīmāṅs ponder, çuçrūṣ obey. Doubtless some of the
apparent roots in the language with sibilant final are akin with the desideratives in origin: e.g.
çikṣ, desiderative of çak.
a. On account of the near relation of desiderative and future (cf. 948 b), the former is
occasionally found where the latter was rather to be expected: thus, rājānam prayiyāsantam
(ÇB.) a king about to depart; prāṇa uccikramiṣan (ChU.) the breath on the point of expiring ;
mumūrṣur ivā ’bhavat (H.) he was fain to die.
IV. Causative.
1041. a. In the later language is allowed to be made from most roots a complete causative
conjugation. The basis of this is a causative stem, formed by appending the causative-sign आय
áya to the, usually strengthened, root.
b. But by no means all conjugation-stems formed by the sign आय áya are of causative value;
and the grammarians regard a part of them as constituting a conjugation-class, the tenth or
cur-class, according to which roots may be inflected as according to the other classes, and
either alone or along with others (775).
c. In RV., the proportion without causative value is fully one third. The formation is a more
obviously denominative one than any of the other conjugation-classes, an intermediate between
them and the proper denominatives. A causative meaning has established itself in connection
with the formation, and become predominant, though not exclusive. A number of roots of late
appearance and probably derivative character are included in the class, and some palpable
denominatives, which lack only the usual denominative accent (below, 1056).
d. The causative formation is of much more frequent use, and more decidedly expanded into
a full conjugation, than either the intensive or the desiderative. It is made from more than
three hundred roots in the early language (in RV., from about one hundred and fifty); but in the
oldest, its forms outside the present-system are (apart from the attached reduplicated aorist:
1046) exceedingly few.
1042. The treatment of the root before the causative-sign अय aya is as follows:

a. Medial or initial i, u, ṛ, ḷ have the guṇa-strengthening (if capable of it: 240; thus, vedaya
from √vid, codaya from √cud, tarpaya from √tṛp; and kalpaya from √kḷp (only example): but
cintaya, gulphaya, dṛṅhaya.
b. But a few roots lack the strengthening: these are, in the older language, cit (citaya and
cetaya), iṣ, iḷ, riṣ (riṣaya and reṣaya), vip (vipaya and vepaya), tuj, tur, tuṣ (tuṣaya and toṣaya),
dyut (dyutaya and dyotaya), ruc (rucaya and rocaya), çuc (çucaya and çocaya) , çubh (cubhaya
and çobhaya) , kṛp, mṛḍ, spṛh; and grabh makes in RV. gṛbhaya. Duṣ and guh lengthen the
vowel instead. Mṛj sometimes has vṛddhi, as in other forms: thus, mārjaya (beside marjaya). On
the other hand, guṇa appears irregularly (240 b) in srevaya (beside çrīvaya), heḍaya, mekṣaya.
Similar irregularities in the later language are giraya, tulaya (also tolaya) , churaya (also
choraya) , muṣaya, sphuraya. No forms without strengthening have a causative value made in
the older language.
c. A final vowel has the vṛddhi-strengthening: thus, cāyaya, çāyaya, cyāvaya, bhāvaya,
dhāraya, sāraya.
d. But no root in i or ī has vṛddhi in the Veda (unless pāyaya [k, below] comes from pī
rather than pā) — as, indeed, regular causatives from such roots are hardly quotable: only RV.
has kṣayaya (beside kṣepaya) from √kṣi possess; for a few alternatively permitted forms, see
below, 1. In B. and S., however, occur çāyaya and sāyaya (√si or sā); and later -āyaya, cāyaya,
smāyaya, ḍāyaya, nāyaya.
e. A few roots have a form also with guṇa-strengthening: thus, cyu, dru, plu, yu  separate,
çru, pū, stu, sru ; jṛ waste away, dṛ pierce, sṛ, smṛ, hṛ; vṛ choose makes varaya later (it is not
found in V.: epic also vāraya).
f. A medial or initial a in a light syllable is sometimes lengthened, and sometimes remains
unchanged: thus, bhājaya, svāpaya, ādaya; janaya, çrathaya, anaya (but mandaya, valgaya,
bhakṣaya).
g. The roots in the older language which keep their short a are jan, pan, svan, dhan, ran,
stan, gam (gāmaya once in RV.), tam, dam, raj (usually rañjaya) , prath, çrath, çnath, vyath,
svad, chad please (also chandaya), nad, dhvas (also dhvaṅsaya), rah, mah (also maṅhaya), nabh
(also nambhaya), tvar, svar, hval. In the later language, further, kvaṇ, jvar, trap, day, paṇ, rac,
ran ring, vadh, val, vaç, çlath, skhal, sthag . Both forms are made (either in the earlier or in the
later language, or in both taken together) by ad, kal, kram, kṣam, khan, ghaṭ, cam, cal, jval,
tvar, dal, dhvan, nad, nam, pat, bhram, math, mad, yam, ram, lag, lal, vam, vyadh, çam be
quiet, çram, çvas, svap. The roots which lengthen the vowel are decidedly the more numerous.
h. If a nasal is taken in any of the strong forms of a root, it usually appears in the causative
stem: e. g. dambhaya, daṅçaya, indhaya,

limpaya, rundhaya, çundhaya, kṛntaya, dṛṅhaya. From a number of roots, stems both with and
without the nasal are made: thus (besides those mentioned above, g), kuñcaya and kocaya,
granthaya and grathaya, bṛṅhaya and barhaya, bhraṅçaya and bhrāçaya, çundhaya and çodhaya,
sañjaya and sajjaya, siñcaya and secaya. In a few of these is seen the influence of present-
stems.
i. Most roots in final ā, and the root ṛ, add p before the conjugation-sign: thus, dāpaya,
dhāpaya, sthāpaya; arpaya.
j. Such stems are made in the older language from the roots kṣā, khyā, gā sing (also
gāyaya), glā, ghrā, jñā, dā give, dā divide, drā run, dhā put and dhā suck, mā measure, mlā,
yā, vā blow, sthā, snā, hā  remove; the later language adds kṣmā, dhmā, and hā leave. From jñā
and snā are found in AV. and later the shortened forms jñapaya and snapaya, and from çrā
only çrapaya (not in RV.). Also, in the later language, glā forms glapaya, and mlā forms
mlapaya.
k. Stems from ā-roots showing no p are, earlier, gāyaya (also gāpaya) from √gā sing,
chāyaya, pāyaya from √pā drink (or pī), pyāyaya from √pyā or pyāy; sāyaya from √sā (or si);
also, later, hvāyaya from √hvā (or hū); — and further, from roots vā weave, vyā, and çā (or çi),
according to the grammarians.
l. The same p is taken also by a few i- and ī-roots, with other accompanying irregularities:
thus, in the older language, kṣepaya (RV., beside kṣayaya) from √kṣi possess; jāpaya (VS. and
later) from √ji; lāpaya (TB. and later; later also lāyaya) from √lī cling; çrāpaya (VS., once) from
√çri; adhyāpaya (S. and later) from adhi+√i; — in the later, kṣapaya (beside kṣayaya) from √kṣi
destroy; māpaya from √mī; smāpaya (beside smāyaya) from √smi; hrepaya from √hrī; — and the
grammarians make further krāpaya from √krī; cāpaya (beside cāyaya) from √ci gather; bhāpaya
(beside bhāyaya and bhīṣaya) from √bhī; repaya from √rī, and vlepaya from √vlī. Moreover, √ruh
makes ropaya (B. and later) beside rohaya (V. and later), and √knū makes knopáya (late).
m. More anomalous cases, in which the so-called causative is palpably the denominative of a
derived 
noun, 
are: pālaya from √pā protect; prīṇaya from √prī; līnaya (according to
grammarians) from √lī; dhūnaya (not causative in sense) from √dhū; bhīṣaya from √bhī; ghātaya
from √han; sphāvaya from √sphā or sphāy.
n. In the Prakrit, the causative stem is made from all roots by the addition of (the
equivalent of) āpaya; and a number (about a dozen) of like formations are quotable from
Sanskrit texts, mostly of the latest period; but three, krīḍāpaya, jīvāpaya, and dīkṣāpaya, occur
in the epics; and two, açāpaya and kṣālāpaya, even in the Sutras.
1043. Inflection: Present-System. The causative stem is inflected in the present-system
precisely like other

stems in अ a (733 a): it will be sufficient to give here in general the first persons of the
different formations, taking as model the stem धारय dhāráya, from √धृ dhṛ. Thus:
1. Present Indicative.
active.
s.
d.
p.
1
धारयािम
dhāráyāmi
धारयावस्
dhāráyāvas
धारयामस्
dhāráyāmas
etc.
etc.
etc.
middle.
s.
d.
p.
1
धारये
dhāráye
धारयावहे
dhāráyāvahe
धारयामहे
dhāráyāmahe
etc.
etc.
etc.
a. The 1st pl. act. in masi greatly outnumbers (as ten to one) that in mas in both RV. and
AV. No example occurs of 2d pl. act. in thana, nor of 3d sing. mid. in e for ate.
2. Present Subjunctive.
For the subjunctive may be instanced all the forms noted as occurring in the older
language:
active.
1
dhāráyāṇi
dhāráyāva
dhāráyāma
2
dhāráyāsi
dhāráyāthas
dhāráyātha
dhāráyās
3
dhāráyāti
dhāráyātas
dhāráyān
dhāráyāt
middle.
1
dhāráyāi
dhāráyāvahāi
2
dhāráyāse
dhāráyādhve
dhāráyādhvāi
3
dhāráyāte
dhāráyāite
dhāráyātāi
b. Only one dual mid. form in āite occurs: mādáyāite (RV.). The only RV. mid. form in āi,
except in 1st du., is mādayādhvāi. The primary endings in 2d and 3d sing. act. are more
common than the secondary.
3. Present Optative.
active.
1
घारयेयम्
dhāráyeyam
धारयेव
dhāráyeva
धारयेम
dhāráyema
etc.
etc.
etc.

middle.
1
धारयेय
dhāráyeya
धारयेविह
dhāráyevahi
धारयेमिह
dhāráyemahi
etc.
etc.
etc.
c. Optative forms are very rare in the oldest language (four in RV., two in AV.); they
become more common in the Brāhmaṇas. A 3d sing. mid. in īta instead of eta (cf. 738 b) occurs
once in B. (kāmayīta AB.), is not very rare in S. (a score or two of examples are quotable), and
is also found in MBh. and later. Of a corresponding 3d pl. in īran only one or two instances can
be pointed out (kāmayīran AÇS., kalpayīran AGS.).
4. Present Imperative.
active.
2
धारय
dhāráya
धारयतम्
dhāráyatam
धारयत
dhāráyata
etc.
etc.
etc.
middle.
2
धारय
dhāráyasva
धारयेथाम्
dhāráyethām
धारयम्
dhāráyadhvam
etc.
etc.
etc.
d. Imperative persons with the ending tāt occur: dhārayatāt (AV.) and cyāvayatāt (ÇB.) are
2d sing.; pātayatāt (ÇB.) is 3d sing.; gamayatāt and cyāvayatāt (K. etc.), and vārayatāt (TB.) are
used as 2d pl. Vārayadhvāt (K. etc.) is 2d pl., and the only known example of such an ending
(see above, 549 b).
5. Present Participle.
धारय्
dhāráyant
धारयमाण
dhāráyamāṇa
e. The feminine of the active participle is regularly and usually made in antī (449 c). But a
very few examples in atī are met with (one in the older language: namayatī Āpast.).
f. The middle participle in māna is made through the whole history of the language, from
RV. (only yātáyamāna) down, and is the only one met with in the earlier language (for ī́rayānas
[sic !], MS. ii. 7. 12, is evidently a false reading, perhaps for írayā nas). But decidedly more
common in the epics and later is one formed with āna: e. g. kāmayāna, cintayāna, pālayāna,
vedayāna. It is quotable from a larger number of roots than is the more regular participle in
māna. As it occurs in no accentuated text, its accent cannot be given.

6. Imperfect.
active.
1.
अधारयम्
ádhārayam
अधारयाव
ádhārayāva
अघारयाम
ádhārayāma
etc.
etc.
etc
middle.
1
अधारये
ádhāraye
अधारयाविह
ádhārayāvahi
अधारयामिह
ádhārayāmahi
etc.
etc.
etc.
1044. As was above pointed out, the formations from the causative stem in aya outside the
present-system are in the oldest language very limited. In RV. are found two forms of the future
in syāmi, one passive participle (coditá), and ten infinitives in dhyāi; also one or two derivative
nouns in tṛ (bodhayitṛ́, codayitrī́), five in iṣṇu, seven in itnu, and a few in a (atipārayá,
nidhārayá, vācamīnkhayá, viçvamejaya), and in u (dhārayú, bhāvayú, mandayú). In AV., also two
s-future forms and four gerunds in tvā; and a few derivative noun-stems, from one of which is
made a periphrastic perfect (gamayā́ṁ cakāra). In the Brāhmaṇas, verbal derivative forms
become more numerous and various, as will be noted in detail below.
1045. Perfect. The accepted causative perfect is the periphrastic (1071 a); a derivative noun
in ā́ is made from the causative stem, and to its accusative, in ā́m, is added the auxiliary: thus,
धारयां चकार dhārayā́ṁ cakāra (or āsa: 1070 b)
धारयां चे dhārayā́ṁ cakre
a. Of this perfect no example occurs in RV. or SV. or VS., only one — gamayā́ṁ cakāra —
in AV., and but half-a-dozen in all the various texts of the Black Yajur-Veda, and these not in
the mantra-parts of the text. They are also by no means frequent in the Brāhmaṇas, except in
ÇB. (where they abound: chiefly, perhaps, for the reason that this work uses in considerable
part the perfect instead of the imperfect as its narrative tense).
1046. Aorist. The aorist of the causative conjugation is the reduplicated, which in general
has nothing to do with the causative stem, but is made directly from the root.
a. It has been already fully described (above, 856 ff.).
b. Its association with the causative is probably founded on an original intensive character
belonging to it as a reduplicated form, and is a matter of gradual growth; in the Veda it is
made from a

considerable number of roots (in RV., more than a third of its instances; in AV., about a fifth)
which have no causative stem in aya.
c. The causative aorist of √धृ dhṛ, then, is as follows:
1
अदीधरम्
ádīdharam
अदीधराव
ádīdharāva
अदीधराम
ádīdharāma
etc.
etc.
etc.
1
अदीधरे
ádīdhare
अदीधराविह
ádīdharāvahi
अदीधरामिह
ádīdharāmahi
etc.
etc.
etc.
An example was inflected in full at 864.
1047. In a few cases, where the root has assumed a peculiar form before the causative sign
— as by the addition of a p or ṣ (above, 1042 i ff.) — the reduplicated aorist is made from this
form instead of from the simple root: thus, atiṣṭhipam from sthāp (stem sthāpaya for √sthā.
Aorist-stems of this character from quasi-roots in āp are arpipa (√ṛ), jījapa or jījipa, jijñapa or
jijñipa, çiçrapa, tiṣṭhipa, jīhipa; the only other example from the older language is bībhiṣa from
bhīṣ for √bhī.
1048. But a few sporadic forms of an iṣ-aorist from causative conjugation-stems are met
with: thus, dhvanayīt (RV.; TS. has instead the wholly anomalous dhvanayit) , vyathayīs and
āilayīt (AV.), pyāyayiaṣṭhās and avādayiṣṭhās (KBU.), in the older language (RV. has also ūnayīs
from a denominative stem); in the later, ahlādayiṣata (DKC.), and probably aghātayithās (MBh.;
for -iṣṭhās: cf. 904 d). The passive 3d sing, aropi, from the causative ropaya, has a late
occurrence (Çatr.).
1049. A precative is of course allowed by the grammarians to be made for the causative
conjugation: in the middle, from the causative stem with the auxiliary i substituted for its final
a; in the active, from the form of the root as strengthened in the causative stem, but without
the causative sign: thus,
धायासम् dhāryāsam etc.
धारियषीय dhārayiṣīya etc.
This formation is to be regarded as purely fictitious.
1050. Futures. Both futures, with the conditional, are made from the causative stem, with
the auxiliary इ i, which takes the place of its final अ a. Thus:
S-Futures.
धारियािम dhārayiṣyā́mi etc.
धारिये dhārayiṣyé etc.
धारिय् dhārayiṣyánt
धारियमाण dhārayiṣyámāṇa

Conditional.
अधारियम् ádhārayiṣyam etc.
अधारिये ádhārayiṣye etc.
Periphrastic Future.
धारियताि dhārayitā́smi etc.
a. It has been mentioned above that RV. and AV. contain only two examples each of the s-
future, and none of the periphrastic. The former begin to appear in the Brāhmaṇas more
numerously, but still sparingly, with participles, and conditional (only adhārayiṣyat ÇB.;
alāpayiṣyathās ChU.); of the latter, ÇB. affords two instances ( pārayitā́smi and janayitā́si).
Examples of both formations are quotable from the later language (including the middle form
darçayitāhev: 947 c).
1051. Verbal Nouns and Adjectives. These are made in two different ways: either 1. from
the full causative stem (in the same manner as the futures, just described); or 2. from the
causatively strengthened root-form (with loss of the causative-sign).
a. To the latter class belong the passive participle, as dhārita; the gerundive and gerund in
ya, as dhārya, -dhārya; and the gerund in am, as dhāram; also, in the older language, the root-
infinitive, as -dhāram etc. (970 a). To the former class belong the infinitive and the gerund in
tvā, as dhārayitum, dhārayitvā, and the gerundive in tavya, as dhārayitavya (also, in the older
language, the infinitives in tavāi and dhyāi, as jánayitavāí, īrayádhyāi, etc.). The auxiliary i is
taken in every formation which ever admits that vowel.
b. Examples of the passive participle are īritá, vāsita, çrāvitá. But from the quasi-root jñap
(1042 j) is made jñapta, without union-vowel.
c. Examples of the infinitive and gerund in tvā are jóṣayitum, dhā́rayitum; kalpayitvā́,
arpayitvā́. But in the epics, and even later, infinitives are occasionally made with loss of the
causative-sign: e. g. çeṣitum, bhāvitum, dhāritum, mocitum.
d. Examples of the gerunds in ya and am are - bhā́jya, -ghārya, -pādya, -vāsya, nāyya,
-sthāpya; -bhā́jam, -sthāpam. But stems showing in the root-syllable no difference from the root
retain ay of the causative-sign in the gerund, to distinguish it from that belonging to the
primary conjugation: e. g. -kramáyya, -gamáyya, -janáyya, -jvaláyya, -kalayya, -çamayya, -racayya,
-āpayya.
e. Examples of the gerundive in tavya are tarpayitavyà, gamayitavya, hvāyayitavya; of that in
ya, sthā́pya, hā́rya, yājya; of that in anīya, sthāpanīya, bhāvanīya.

f. Examples of other formations occurring in the older language are as follows: root-
infinitive, -sthāpam, -vāsas; — infinitive in tu, other cases than accusative, -janayitave;
jánayitavāí, pā́yayitavāí, -çcotayitavāí; çámayitos; — infinitive in dhyāi, iṣayádhyāi, īrayádhyāi,
taṅsayádhyāi, nāçayádhyāi, mandayádhyāi, mādayádhyāi, riṣayádhyāi, vartayádhyāi, vājayádhyāi,
syandayádhyāi (all RV.); — gerundive in āyya, panayā́yya, spṛhayā́yya, trayayā́yya (? √trā).
g. Other noun-derivatives from the causative stem are not infrequent, being decidedly more
numerous and various than from any other of the secondary conjugation-stems. Examples (of
other kinds than those instanced in 1044) are: árpaṇa, dāpana, prīṇana, bhī́ṣaṇa; jñāpaka,
ropaka; patayālú, spṛhayālu; jánayati, jñapti.
h. All the classes of derivatives, it will be noticed, follow in regard to accent the analogy of
similar formations from the simple root, and show no influence of the special accent of the
causative-stem.
1052. Derivative or Tertiary Conjugations. From the causative stem are made a passive and
a desiderative conjugation. Thus:
a. The passive-stem is formed by adding the usual passive-sign य yá to the causatively
strengthened root, the causative-sign being dropped: thus, धायते dhāryáte.
b. Such passives are hardly found in the Veda (only bhājyá- AV.), but some thirty instances
are met with in the Brāhmaṇas and Sūtras: examples are jñapyá- (TS.), sādya- (K.), pādya-
(AB.), vādya- (TB.), sthāpya- (GB.); and they become quite common later.
c. The desiderative stem is made by reduplication and addition of the sign इष iṣa, of which
the initial vowel replaces the final of the causative stem: thus, िदधारियषित dīdhārayiṣati.
d. These, too, are found here and there in the Brāhmaṇas and later (about forty stems are
quotable): examples are pipāyayiṣa (K.), bibhāvayiṣa and cikalpayiṣa and lulobhayiṣa (AB.),
dídrāpayiṣa and rirādhayiṣa and āpipayiṣa (ÇB.), and so on.
e. As to causatives made from the intensive and desiderative stems, see above, 1025, 1039.
V. Denominative.
1058. A denominative conjugation is one that has for its basis a noun-stem.
a. It is a view now prevailingly held that most of the present-systems of the Sanskrit verb,
along with other formations analogous with a

present-system, are in their ultimate origin denominative; and that many apparent roots are of
the same character. The denominatives which are so called differ from these only in that their
origin is recent and undisguised.
1054. The grammarians teach that any noun-stem in the language may be converted,
without other addition than that of an अ a (as union-vowel enabling it to be inflected according
to the second general conjugation) into a present-stem, and conjugated as such.
a. But such formations are rare in actual use. The RV. has a few isolated and doubtful
examples, the clearest of which is bhiṣákti he heals, from bhiṣáj physician; it is made like a
form of the root-class; abhiṣṇak seems to be its imperfect according to the nasal class; and
pátyate he rules appears to be a denominative of páti master; other possible cases are iṣaṇas
etc., kṛpáṇanta, taruṣema etc., vanuṣanta, bhurajanta, vánanvati. From the other older texts are
quotable kavyánt (TS.), áçlonat (TB.), unmūlati (ṢB.), svadhāmahe (ÇÇS.). And a considerable
number of instances, mostly isolated, are found in the later language: e. g. kalahant (MBh.),
arghanti 
(Pañç.), abjati 
(Çatr.), gardabhati 
(SD.), utkaṇṭhate 
(SD.), jagannetrati (Pras.),
keliçvetasahasrapattrati (Pras.).
1055. In general, the base of denominative conjugation is made from the noun-stem by
means of the conjugation-sign य yá, which has the accent.
a. The identity of this ya with the ya of the so-called causative conjugation, as making with
the final a of a noun-stem the causative-sign aya, is hardly to be questioned. What relation it
sustains to the ya of the ya-class (759), of the passive (768), and of the derivative intensive
stem (1016), is much more doubtful.
1056. Intermediate between the denominative and causative conjugations stands a class of
verbs, plainly denominative in origin, but having the causative accent. Examples, beginning to
appear at the earliest period of the language, are mantráyate speaks, takes counsel, (from
mantra, √man + tra), kīrtáyati commemorates (from kīrti, √kṛ praise), artháyati or -te makes an
object of, seeks (from ártha goal, object), varṇayati depicts (from varṇa color), kathayati or -te
gives the how of anything, relates  (from katham how?), and so on. These, along with like forms
from roots which have no other present-system (though they may make scattering forms outside
that system from the root directly), or which have this beside other present-systems without
causative meaning, are reckoned by the grammarians as a separate conjugation-class, the cur-
class (above, 607, 775).

1057. Denominatives are formed at every period in the history of the language, from the
earliest down.
a. They are frequent in RV., which contains over a hundred, of all varieties; AV. has only
half as many (and personal forms from hardly a third as many: from the rest, present
participles, or derivative nouns); AB., less than twenty; ÇB., hardly more than a dozen; and so
on. In the later language they are quotable by hundreds, but from the vast majority of stems
occur only an example or two; the only ones that have won any currency are those that have
assumed the character of "cur-class" verbs.
1058. The denominative meaning is, as in other languages, of the greatest variety; some of
the most frequent forms of it are: be like, act as, play the part of; regard  or treat as; cause to
be, make into; use, make application of; desire, wish for, crave — that which is signified by the
noun-stem.
a. The modes of treatment of the stem-final are also various; and the grammarians make a
certain more or less definite assignment of the varieties of meaning to the varieties of form; but
this allotment finds only a dubious support in the usages of the words as met with even in the
later language, and still less in the earlier. Hence the formal classification, according to the
final of the noun-stem and the way in which this is treated before the denominative sign yá,
will be the best one to follow.
1059. From stems in a. a. The final a of a noun-stem oftenest remains unchanged: thus,
amitrayáti plays the enemy, is hostile; devayáti cultivates the gods, is pious.
b. But final a is also often lengthened: thus, aghāyáti plans mischief; priyāyáte holds dear;
açvāyáti seeks for horses; açanāyáti desires food.
c. While in the Veda the various modes of denominative formation are well distributed, no
one showing a marked preponderance, in the later language the vast majority of denominatives
(fully seven eighths) are of the two kinds just noticed: namely, made from a-stems, and of the
form aya or āya, the former predominating. And there is seen a decided tendency to give the
denominatives in aya an active form and transitive meaning, and those in āya a middle form
and intransitive or reflexive meaning. In not a few cases, parallel formations from the same
stem illustrate this distinction: e. g. kaluṣayati makes turbid, kaluṣāyate is or becomes turbid;
taruṇayati rejuvenates, taruṇāyate is rejuvenated; çithilayati loosens, çithilāyate grows loose. No
distinct traces of this distinction are

recognizable in the Veda, although there also corresponding forms with short a and with long ā
sometimes stand side by side.
d. Final a is sometimes changed to ī (very rarely i): thus, adhvarīyáti performs the sacrifice;
taviṣīyáti is mighty; putrīyáti or putriyáti desires a son; māṅsīyáti craves flesh; sajjīyate is ready;
candrakāntiīati is moonstonelike. Not fifty stems of this form are quotable.
e. It is occasionally dropped (after n or r): thus, turaṇyáti is rapid; adhvaryáti performs the
sacrifice.
f. Other modes of treatment are sporadic: thus, the addition of s, as in stanasyati seeks the
breast; the change of a to e, as in vareyáti plays the wooer.
1060. From stems in ā. Final ā usually remains, as in gopāyáti plays the herdsman, protects;
pṛtanāyati fights; but it is sometimes treated in the other methods of an a-stem: thus, pṛtanyati
fights; tilottamīyati acts Tilottama.
1061. From stems in i, ī, and u, ū. Such stems are (especially those in u, ū) very rare. They
show regularly ī and ū before ya: thus, arātīyáti (also -tiy- ) plots injury; janīyáti (also -niy-)
seeks a wife; sakhīyáti desires friendship; nārīyate turns woman; — çatrūyáti acts the foe;
ṛjūyáti is straight; vasūyáti desires wealth; asūyáti grumbles, is discontented: with short u,
gātuyáti sets in motion.
a. More rarely, i or u is treated as a (or else is gunated, with loss of a y or v): thus,
dhunayáti comes snorting; laghayati makes easier. Sometimes, as to a (above, 1059f), a sibilant
is added: thus, aviṣyáti is vehement; uruṣyáti saves. From dhī, RV. makes dhiyāyáte.
1062. From other vowel-stems, a. Final ṛ is changed to rī: thus, mātrīyáti treats as a mother
(only quotable example).
b. The diphthongs, in the few cases that occur, have their final element changed to a
semivowel: thus, gavyáti seeks cattle, goes a-raiding.
1063. From consonant-stems. A final consonant usually remains before ya: thus, bhiṣajyáti
plays the physician, cures; ukṣaṇyáti acts like a bull ; apasyáti is active; namasyáti pays
reverence; sumanasyáte is favorably disposed; taruṣyáti fights.
a. But a final n is sometimes dropped, and the preceding vowel treated as a final: thus,
rājāyáte or rājīyáti is kingly, from rājan; -karmayati from -karman; svāmīyati treats as master,
from svāmin: vṛṣāyáte from vṛṣan is the only example quotable from the older language.
Sporadic cases occur of other final consonants similarly treated: thus, ojāyáte from ojas,
-manāyate from -manas; — while, on the other hand, an a-vowel is occasionally added to such a
consonant before ya: thus, iṣayáti from iṣ, satvanāyati from satvan.
1064. The largest class of consonantal stems are those showing a s before the ya; and, as
has been seen above, a sibilant is sometimes, by analogy, added to a final vowel, making the
denominative-sign virtually sya

— or even, with a also added after an i- or u- vowel, asya; and this comes to be recognized by
the grammarians as an independent sign, forming denominatives that express desire: thus,
sumakhasyáte is merry; jīvanasya- (in -syā́ love of life) ; vṛṣasyati desires the male  (the only
quotable examples); madhuṣyati or madhvasyati longs for honey; kṣīrasyati craves milk.
1065. The grammarians reckon as a special class of denominatives in kāmya what are really
only ordinary ones made from a compound noun-stem having kāma as its final member: thus,
rathakāmyati longs for the chariot (K.: only example found in the older language); arthakāmyati
desires wealth; putrakāmyati wishes a son (the only quotable examples); coming from the
possessive compounds rathakāma etc. And arthāpāyati treats as property is a (sole quotable)
example of a stem having the Prakritic causative form (1042 n).
a. Stems of anomalous formation are drāghaya from dīrgha, draḍhaya from dṛḍha, and
perhaps mradaya from mṛdu.
1066. a. A number of denominative stems occur in the Veda for which no corresponding
noun-stems are found, although for all or nearly all of them related words appear: thus, an̄kūyá,
stabhūyá, iṣudhya; dhiṣaṇyá, riṣaṇyá, ruvaṇya, huvanya, iṣaṇyá; ratharyá, çratharyá, saparyá;
iyasya (ÇB.), irasyá, daçasyá, makhasyá, panasyá, sacasyá. Those in anya, especially, look like
the beginnings of a new conjugation-class.
b. Having still more that aspect, however, are a Vedic group of stems in āya, which in
general have allied themselves to present-systems of the nā-class (732), and are found alongside
the forms of that class: thus, gṛbhāyáti beside gṛbhṇāti. Of such, RV. has gṛbhāyá, mathāyá,
pruṣāyá, muṣāyá, çrathāya, skabhāyá, stabhāyá. A few others have no nā-class companions:
thus, damāyá, çamāyá, tudāyá  (AV.); and panāya, naçāya, vṛṣāya (√vṛṣ rain) , vasāyá (√vas
clothe), and perhaps açāya (√āç attain).
c. Here may be mentioned also quasi-denominatives made from onomatopoetic combinations
of sounds, generally with repetition: e. g. kiṭakiṭāya, thatathatarāya, miṣamiṣāya, çaraçarāya.
1067. The denominative stems in RV. and AV. with causative accentuation are: RV. an̄kháya,
artháya, iṣáya (also iṣayá) , ūrjáya, ṛtáya, kṛpáya, mantráya, mṛgáya, vavráya, vājáya  (also
vājayá), vīḷáya, suṣváya (also suṣvayá); AV. adds kīrtáya, dhūpā́ya, pāláya, vīráya, sabhāgáya.
a. The accent of ánniya and hástaya (RV.) is wholly anomalous.
1068. Inflection. The denominative stems are inflected with regularity like the other stems
ending in अ a (733 a) throughout the present-system. Forms outside of

that system — except from the stems which are reckoned to the causative or cur-class, and
which follow in all respects the rules for that class — are of the utmost rarity.
a. In RV. occurs no form not belonging to the present-system, except ūnayīs (with mā́
prohibitive), an iṣ-aorist 2d sing. (cf. 1048). Further examples of this aorist are āsūyīt (ÇB.),
pāpayiṣṭa (TS.: pl., with mā́ prohibitive), and avṛṣāyiṣata (VS. etc.). The form ásaparyāit (AV.
xiv. 2. 20), with āi for ī (555 c), might be aorist; but, as the metre shows, is probably a corrupt
reading; amanasyāit, certainly imperfect, appears to occur in TB. (ii. 3. 8 3). Other forms begin
to appear in the Brāhmaṇas: e. g. the futures gopāyiṣyati (ÇB.), meghāyiṣyánt, kaṇḍūyiṣyánt,
çīkāyiṣyánt (TS.), the participles bhiṣajyitá (? JB. -jita) and iyasitá (ÇB.), kaṇḍūyitá, çīkitá, and
meghitá (TS.), the gerund saṁçlákṣṇya (ÇB.), and so on. In the later language, also, forms
outside the present-system (except the participle in ta) are only sporadic; and of tertiary
conjugation forms there are hardly any: examples are the causatives dhūmāyaya and asūyaya
(MBh.), and the desiderative abhiṣiṣenayiṣa (Çiç.).
b. Noun-derivatives from denominative stems follow the analogy of those from causative
stems (1051 g). In the older language, those in u and ā (especially the former) are much the
most numerous; later, that in ana prevails over all others.
CHAPTER XV.
PERIPHRASTIC AND COMPOUND CONJUGATION.
1069. One periphrastic formation, the periphrastic future, has been already described (942
ff.), since it has become in the later language a recognized part of every verbal conjugation,
and since, though still remaining essentially periphrastic, it has been so fused in its parts and
altered in construction as to assume in considerable measure the semblance of an integral
tense-formation.
By far the most important other formation of the class is —

The Periphrastic Perfect.
1070. This (though almost unknown in the Veda, and coming only gradually into use in the
Brāhmaṇas) is a tense widely made and frequently used in the classical Sanskrit.
a. It is made by prefixing the accusative of a derivative noun-stem in आ ā́ (accented) to the
perfect tense of an auxiliary verb: namely, of √ kṛ make, more often of √अस् as be, and very
rarely of √भू bhū be.
b. In the older language (see below, 1073d), kṛ is almost the only auxiliary used in making
this tense, as occurring very few times, and bhū never. Later, also, bhū is quite rare (it is
found nine times in MBh., six times in Rgh., and a few times elsewhere), but as gains very
greatly in currency, having become the usual auxiliary, while kṛ is only exceptional.
c. Somewhat similar formations with yet other auxiliaries are not absolutely unknown in the
later language: thus, varayām pracakramus 
(MBh.), pūrayām 
(etc.) vyadhus (Viracaritra),
mṛgayām avāsit (ib.).
1071. The periphrastic perfect occurs as follows:
a. It is the accepted perfect of the derivative conjugations: intensive, desiderative, causative,
and denominative; the noun in आ ā́ being made from the present-stem which is the general
basis of each conjugation: thus, from √बुध् budh, intensive बोबुधाम् bobudhā́m, desiderative बुभुाम्
bubhutsā́m, causative बोधयाम् bodhayā́m; denominative मयाम् mantrayā́m.
b. The formation from causative stems (including those denominatives which have assumed
the aspect of causatives: 1056) is by far the most frequent. Only a few desideratives are
quotable (1034 a), and of intensives only jāgarām āsa (1020 a; beside jajāgāra).
c. Most roots beginning with a vowel in a heavy syllable (long by nature or long by
position) make this perfect only, and not the simple one: thus, आसाम् āsā́m from √आस् ās sit,
ईाम् īkṣā́m from √ई īkṣ see; उाम् ujjhām from √उ ujh forsake; एधाम् edhām from √एध् edh
thrive (the only examples quotable).

d. Excepted are the roots āp and āñch, and those beginning with a before two consonants (and
taking ān as reduplication: 788).
e. The roots (that is, stems reckoned by the grammarians as roots) of more than one
syllable have their perfect of this formation: thus, cakāsā́m. But ūrṇu (713) is said to form
ūrṇonāva only; while jāgṛ (1020) makes a perfect of either formation, and daridrā (1024 a) is
said to do the same.
f. A few other roots make the periphrastic in addition to the usual reduplicated perfect.
Thus, in the older language only are found the stems cāyām, tāyām, nilsyām, vāsām (√vas
dwell), vidām (√vid know), vyayām, and the reduplicated stems bibhayām and juhavām; the later
language adds ayām, jayām, dayām, nayām, smayām, hvayām, and the reduplicated bibharām;
and the grammarians teach like formations from uṣ, kās, and the reduplicating hrī. The stem is
made in every case from the present-stem, with guṇa of a final vowel.
1072. The periphrastic perfect of the middle voice is made with the middle inflection of √
kṛ. For passive use, the auxiliaries अस् as and भू bhū are said to be allowed to take a middle
inflection.
a. One or two late examples of bhū with middle inflection have been pointed out, but none
of as.
b. It is unnecessary to give a paradigm of this formation, as the inflection of the auxiliaries
is the same as in their independent use: for that of √kṛ, see 800 k; of √bhū, see 800 d; of √as,
see 800m.
c. The connection of the noun and auxiliary is not so close that other words are not
occasionally allowed to come between them: thus, mīmāṅsā́m evá cakré (ÇB.) he merely
speculated; vidāṁ vā idam ayaṁ cakāra (JB.) he verily knew this; prabhraṅçayāṁ yo naghuṣaṁ
cakāra who made Naghusha fall headlong  (Rgh.).
1073. The above is an account of the periphrastic formation with a derivative noun in ām as
it appears especially in the later language; earlier, its aspect is rather that of a more general,
but quite infrequent, combination of such a noun with various forms of the root kṛ. Thus:
a. Of the periphrastic perfect occurs only a single example in the whole body of Vedic texts
(metrical): namely, gamayā́ṁ cakāra (AV.). In the Brāhmaṇas examples from causative stems
begin to appear more freely, but are everywhere few in number, except in ÇB. (which has them
from twenty-four roots, and a few of these in several occurrences). From desiderative stems
they are yet rarer (only seven occurrences, five of them in ÇB.: see 1034 a); and from
intensives they are unknown. The periphrastic perfects of primary conjugation were noted above
(1071 f: in ÇB.,

eight stems and about eighty occurrences, chiefly from īkṣ, bhī, and vid; that from vid is found
in the greatest number of texts).
b. Forms with the aorist of the auxiliary are in the oldest Brāhmaṇas as numerous as those
with the perfect. Thus, with akar occur ramayām (K.), janayā́m and sādayā́m and svadayā́m and
sthāpayā́m (MS.); and with akran, vidā́m (TS. TB. MS.). With the aorist optative or precative
has been found only pāvayā́ṁ kriyāt (MS.).
c. Like combinations with other tenses are not entirely unknown: thus, juhavāṁ karoti
(ÇÇS.). So also in the later language, where have been found quotable half-a-dozen such cases
as vidāṁ karoti (Pañc.), vidāṁ karotu and kurvantu (Pañc. etc.).
d. Only two or three cases of the use of as instead of kṛ as auxiliary are met with in the
older language: they are mantrayām āsa (AB. GB.), janayām āsa (ÇvU.), and īkṣām āsa (ÇÇS.).
e. A single example of an accented auxiliary is met with in the accentuated texts: namely,
atirecayā́ṁ cakrús (ÇB.). As was to be expected, from the nature of the combination, the noun
also retains its accent (compare 945).
Participial Periphrastic Phrases.
1074. The frequent use, especially in the later language, of a past or a future passive
participle with the copula (or also without it) to make participial phrases having a value
analogous to that of verb-tenses, has been already noticed (999). But other similar combinations
are not unknown in any period of the language, as made with other auxiliaries, or with other
participles.
a. They occur even in the Veda, but are far more common and conspicuous in the
Brāhmaṇas, and become again of minor account in the later language.
1075. Examples of the various formations are as follows:
a. A (usually present) participle with the tenses of the verb i go. This is the combination, on
the whole, of widest and most frequent occurrence. Thus: áyajvano vibhájann éti védaḥ (RV.) he
ever gives away the wealth of the non-offerer; yathā sūcyā vāsaḥ saṁdadhad iyād evam evāi
’tābhir yajñasya chidraṁ saṁdadhad eti (AB.) just as one would mend [habitually] a garment
with a needle, so with these one mends any defect of the sacrifice; agnir vā idaṁ vāiçvānaro
dahann āit 
(PB.) Agni Vaiçvānara kept burning this creation ; té ‘surāḥ párājitā yánto
dyā́vāpṛthivī́ úpāçrayan (TB.) those Asuras, getting beaten, took refuge with heaven and earth ;
tè ‘sya gṛhā́ḥ paçáva upamūryámāṇā īyuḥ (ÇB.) the animals, his family, would be continually
destroyed.

b. The same with the verb car go (continually or habitually), signifying still more distinctly
than the preceding a continued or habitual action. Thus: agnā́v agníç carati práviṣṭaḥ (AV.) Agni
is constantly present in the fire; adaṇdyaṁ daṇḍena ghnantaç caranti (PB.) they make a practice
of beating with a rod what is undeserving of punishment.
c. The same with the verbs ās sit and sthā stand, with a like meaning. Thus, juhvata āsate
(K.) they continue sacrificing; te ‘pakramya prativāvadato ‘tiṣṭhan (AB.) they, having gone off,
kept vehemently refusing. In the later language, sthā is the verb oftenest used, with predicates
of various kind, to make a verbal phrase of continuance.
d. A present or future or perfect participle with as and bhū be. The participle is oftenest a
future one; as only is used in the optative, bhū usually in other forms. Thus: yaḥ pūrvam
anījānaḥ syāt (AB.) whoever may not have made sacrifice before ; samāvad eva yajñe kurvāṇā
āsan (GB.) they did the same thing at the sacrifice ; parikrī́ḍanta āsan (MS.) they were playing
about; yátra suptvā́ púnar nā̀ ’vadrāsyán bhávati  (ÇB.) when, after sleeping, he is not going to
fall asleep again; havyaṁ hi vakṣyan bhavati (AB.) for he is intending to carry the sacrifice ;
dāsyant syāt (K.) may be going to give; yéna vā́hanena syantsyánt syā́t (ÇB.) with what vehicle
he may be about to drive. True expressions for perfect and pluperfect and future perfect time
are capable of being made by such means, and now and then are made, but in no regular and
continued fashion.
Composition with Prepositional Prefixes.
1076. All the forms, personal and other, of verbal conjugation — of both primary and
secondary conjugation, and even to some extent of denominative (so far as the denominative
stems have become assimilated in value to simple roots) — occur very frequently in combination
with certain words of direction, elements of an adverbial character (see the next chapter), the
so-called prepositions (according to the original use of that term), or the verbal prefixes.
a. Practically, in the later language, it is as if a compounded root were formed, out of root
and prefix, from which then the whole conjugation (with derivatives: below, chap. XVII.) is
made, just as from the simple root. Yet, even there (and still more in the older language: 1081
a–c), the combination is so loose, and the members retain so much of their independent value,
that in most dictionaries (that of Sir Monier Williams is an exception) the conjugation of each
root with prefixes is treated under the simple root, and not in the alphabetic order of the
prefix. Derivative words, however,

are by universal agreement given in their independent alphabetic place, like simple words.
1077. Those verbal prefixes which have value as such throughout the whole history of the
language are given below, in alphabetic order, with their fundamental meanings:
अित áti across, beyond, past, over, to excess;
अिध ádhi above, over, on, on to;
अनु ánu after, along, toward;
अ antár between, among, within;
अप ápa away, forth, off;
अिप ápi unto, close upon or on;
अिभ abhi to, unto, against (often with implied violence);
अव áva down, of;
आ ā́ to, unto, at;
उ úd up, up forth or out;
उप úpa to, unto, toward;
िन ní down; in, into;
िनस् nís out, forth;
परा párā to a distance, away, forth;
पिर pári round about, around;
 prá forward, onward, forth, fore;
ित práti in reversed direction, back to or against, against, in return;
िव ví apart, asunder, away, out;
सम् sám along, with, together.
a. Some of these, of course, are used much more widely and frequently than others. In
order of frequency in the older language (as estimated by the number of roots with which they
are found used in RV. and AV.), they stand as follows: pra, ā, vi, sam, abhi, ni, ud, pari, anu,
upa, prati, ava, nis, ati, apa, parā, adhi, api, antar. Api is of very limited use as prefix in the
later language, having become a conjunction, too, also.
b. The meanings given above are only the leading ones. In combinations of root and prefix
they undergo much modification, both literal and figurative — yet seldom in such a way that
the steps of transition from the fundamental sense are not easy to trace. Sometimes, indeed,
the value of a


root is hardly perceptibly modified by the addition of the prefix. An intensive force is not
infrequently given by pari, vi, and sam.
1078. Prefixes essentially akin with the above, but more distinctly adverbial, and of more
restricted use, are these:
ácha (or áchā) to, unto: tolerably frequent in RV. (used with over twenty roots), but already
unusual in AV. (only two roots), quite restricted in B., and entirely lost in the later language;
āvís forth to sight, in view:  used only with the roots bhū, as, and kṛ;
tirás through, crossways; out of sight:  hardly used except with kṛ, dhā, bhū (in RV., with
three or four others);
purás in front, forward: used with only half-a-dozen roots, especially kṛ, dhā, i;
prādús forth to view: only with bhū, as, kṛ.
a. A few others, as bahis outside, vinā without, alam (with bhū and kṛ) sufficiently, properly,
sākṣāt in view, are still less removed from ordinary adverbs.
1079. Of yet more limited use, and of noun-rather than adverb-value, are:
çrad (or çrath?), only with dhā (in RV., once also with kṛ): çraddhā believe, credit;
hin̄, only with kṛ (and obsolete in the classical language): hin̄kṛ make the sound, hing low,
murmur.
a. And beside these stand yet more fortuitous combinations: see below, 1091.
1080. More than one prefix may be set before the same root. Combinations of two are quite
usual; of three, much less common; of more than three, rare. Their order is in general
determined only by the requirements of the meaning, each added prefix bringing a further
modification to the combination before which it is set. But आ ā́ is almost never allowed, either
earlier or later, to be put in front of any of the others.
a. The very rare cases of apparent prefixion of ā to another prefix (as āvihanti MBh.,
āvitanvānāḥ BhP.) are perhaps best explained as having the ā used independently, as an adverb.
1081. In classical Sanskrit, the prefix stands immediately before the verbal form.
a. In the earlier language, however (especially in the Veda; in the Brāhmaṇa less often and
more restrictedly), its position is quite

free: it may be separated from the verb by another word or words, and may even come after
the form to which it belongs; it may also stand alone, qualifying a verb that is understood, or
conjointly with another prefix one that is expressed.
b. Thus, sá devā́ṅ é ’há vakṣyati  (RV.) he shall bring the gods hither;  prá ṇa ā́yūṅṣi tāriṣat
(AV.) may he lengthen out our lives;  tā́v ā́ yātam úpa dravát  (RV.) do ye two come hither
quickly; gámad vā́jebhir ā́ sá naḥ (RV.) may he come with gifts hither to us ; pári mā́m pári me
prajā́m pári ṇaḥ pāhi yád dhánam (AV.) protect me, my progeny, and what wealth we own;
yátaḥ sadyá ā́ ca párā ca yánti  (AV.) from whence every day they advance and retire;  vy àháṁ
sárveṇa pāpmánā [avṛtam] ví yákṣmeṇa sám ā́yuṣā (AV.) I have separated from all evil, from
disease, [I have joined myself] with life; vi hy enena paçyati  (AB.) for by it he sees; ví vā́ eṣá
prajáyā paçúbhir ṛdhyate (TB.) he is deprived of progeny and cattle.
c. Three or four instances have been cited from the later language of a prefix separated
from, or following, a verb; perhaps the prefix in every such case admits of being regarded as
an adverb.
1082. As regards the accent of verb-forms compounded with prefixes, only the case needs to
be considered in which the prefix stands (as always in the later language) immediately before
the verb; otherwise, verb and prefix are treated as two independent words.
1083. a. A personal verbal form, as has been seen above (592), is ordinarily unaccented:
before such a form, the prefix has its own accent; or, if two or more precede the same form,
the one nearest the latter is so accented, and the others lose their accent.
b. If, however, the verb-form is accented, the prefix or prefixes lose their accent.
c. That is, in every case, the verb along with its normally situated prefix or prefixes so far
constitutes a unity that the whole combination is allowed to take but a single accent.
d. Examples are: páre ’hi nāri púnar é ’hi kṣiprám  (AV.) go away, woman; come again
quickly; áthā́ ’staṁ vipáretana 
(RV.) then scatter ye away to your home;  samā́cinuṣvā
’nusampráyāhi (AV.) gather together, go forth together after;  yád gṛhā́n upodāíti (AV.) when he
goes up to the house; evā́ ca tvám sarama ājagántha (RV.) now that you, Saramā, have thus
come hither; yénā́ ”viṣṭitaḥ pravivéçithā ’páḥ (RV.) enveloped in which thou didst enter the
waters.
1084. A prefix, however, not seldom has a more independent value, as a general adverb of
direction, or as a preposition (in the usual modern sense of that term), belonging to and
governing a noun; in such case, it is not drawn in to form part of a verbal compound, but has
its own accent. The two kinds of use shade into one another, and are not divisible by any
distinct and fixed line.

a. There is in RV. a considerable number of cases (some thirty) in which the pada-text gives
unnecessarily, and probably wrongly, an independent accent to a prefix before an accented verb
(or other prefix): resolving, for example, ā́rūhat into ā́ áruhat, vyácet into ví ácet, abhyávarṣīt
into abhí ávarṣīt, vyā́sarat into ví ā́ asarat (instead of ā-áruhat etc.).
1085. In combination with the non-personal parts of the verb-system — with participles,
infinitives, and gerunds — the general rule is that the prefix loses its accent, in favor of the
other member of the compound. But the prefix instead has sometimes the accent: namely, when
combined —
a. with the passive participle in ta or na: thus, páreta gone forth; antárhita concealed;
ávapanna fallen; sámpūrṇa complete (cf. 1284).
b. But some exceptions to this rule are met with: e. g., in RV., nicitá, niṣkṛtá, praçastá,
niṣattá, etc.; in AV., apakrītá.
c. with the infinitive in tu (972), in all its cases: thus, sáṁhartum to collect; ápidhātave to
cover up; ávagantos of descending. The doubly accented dative in tavāí retains its final accent,
but throws the other back upon the prefix: thus, ánvetavāí for following; ápabhartavāí for
carrying off.
1086. The closeness of combination between the root and the prefix is indicated not only by
their unity of accent, but also by the euphonic rules (e. g. 185, 192), which allow the mutual
adaptations of the two to be made to some extent as if they were parts of a unitary word.
1087. A few special irregularities call for notice:
a. In the later language, api, adhi, and ava, in connection with certain roots and their
derivatives, sometimes lose the initial vowel: namely, api with nah and dhā, adhi with sthā, ava
w i t h gāh etc.: e. g. pinaddha, pihita, dhiṣṭhita, vagāhya, vataṅsa, vadānya, vaṣṭabhya,
vamajjana, vekṣaṇa, valepana. In the Veda, on the other hand, iṣ is in a few cases found instead
(apparently) of nis with √kṛ.
b. The final vowel of a prefix, especially an i, is (oftenest in the older language) sometimes
lengthened, especially in derivative words: e. g. pratīkāra, nīvṛt, parīhāra, vīrúdh, adhīvāsá,
ápīvṛta, abhīvartá; anūrúdh; avāyatī́, prāvṛ́ṣ, úpāvasu. In the Veda, the initial of anu is
sometimes lengthened after negative an: e. g. anānudá, anānukṛtyá.
c. In combination with √i go, the prefixes parā, pari, and pra sometimes change their r to l.
In this way is formed a kind of derivative stem palāy flee, inflected according to the a-class, in
middle voice, which is not uncommon from the Brāhmaṇas down, and has so lost the
consciousness of its origin that it sometimes takes the augment prefixed: thus, apalāyiṣṭhās
(ÇÇS.), apalāyata (R.), apalāyanta (MBh.); it makes

the periphrastic perfect palāyāṁ cakre. The stem palyay, similarly inflected, occurs only in one
or two texts (ÇB. JB. JUB.); and plāy has been found nowhere except in MS. Also the imperfect
nílāyata (TS. TB.: not separated in the pada-text) and perfect nilayā́ṁ cakre (ÇB.) are doubtless
a corresponding formation from √i with nis, though nearly akin in form and meaning with forms
from √lī+ni. So also pari becomes pali in the combination palyan̄g (ÇB. ÇÇS.), whether viewed
as a denominative formation or as √an̄g+pari. And MS. has once plā́kṣārayan (iii. 10. 2; in an
etymology).
d. The root kṛ make sometimes assumes (or retains from a more original condition) an initial s
after the prefixes sam, pari, nis, and upa: thus, saṁskurute, samaskurvan, saṁskṛta, etc.;
pariṣkṛṇvanti, pariṣkṛta, etc.; nír askṛta; upaskṛta. And √kṛ scatter is said by the grammarians to
a d d s in the same manner, under certain circumstances, after apa 
and prati (only
apaskiramāṇa, praticaskare, both late, are quotable).
e. The passive participle of the roots dā give and dā cut has often the abbreviated form tta
after a prefix — of which the final vowel, if i, is lengthened (compare 955 f, and the derivative
in ti, below, 1157 c).
f. In a few sporadic cases, the augment is taken before a prefix, instead of between it and the
root: thus, avaṣaṭkārṣīt (GB.); udaprapatat (AB.); anvasaṁcarat, pratyasaṁharat, pratyavyūhat,
anvavīkṣetām, aprāiṣīt, asambhramat 
(MBh.); abhyanimantrayat 
(Har.); vyāvasthāpi (SDS.);
compare also the forms from palāy, above, c. And AB. has once niniyoja (for niyuyoja, as read
in the corresponding passage of ÇÇS.). Some of the apparent roots of the language have been
suspected of being results of a similar unification of root and prefix: e. g. āp from ā+ap, vyac
from vi+ac, tyaj from ati+aj.
g. The loss of the initial s of sthā and stambh after the prefix ud has been noticed above (233
c). Also (137 a, c), certain peculiarities of combination of a prefix with the initial vowel of a
root.
1088. As to the more general adverbial uses of the prefixes, and their prepositional uses, see
the next chapter.
1089. As to the combination of the particles a or an privative, dus ill, and su well, with
verb-forms, see 1121 b,g,i. As to the addition of the comparative and superlative suffixes tarām
and tamām to verbs, see above, 473 c.
Other Verbal Compounds.
1090. It has been seen above that some of the prepositional prefixes are employed in
combination with only very small classes of roots, namely those whose meaning makes them
best fitted for auxiliary and periphrastic uses such as kṛ make, bhū and as be, dhā put, i go —

and that the first of these are widely used in com-

bination with a derivative in ām to make a periphrastic conjugation. Such roots have also been,
from the earliest period of the language, but with increasing frequency, used in somewhat
analogous combinations with other elements, substantive and adjective as well as adverbial; and
this has become, in part, developed finally into a regular and indefinitely extensible method of
increasing the resources of verbal expression.
1091. a. The older language has a number of (mostly) reduplicative onomatopoetic
compounds with roots kṛ and bhū, the prefixed element ending in ā or ī (generally the former):
thus, in RV., akkhalīkṛ́tya croaking, jañjanābhávant flimmering, alalābhávant making merry,
kikirā́ kṛṇu tear; in AV., maṣmaṣā́ ’karam I have crushed; in VS., masmasā́ (also TS.; MS.
mṛsmṛsā́) kuru; 
in 
TS., malmalābhávant; 
in 
K., manmalābhavant, kikkitākāra; in MS.,
bibibābhávant, bharbharā́ ’bhavat; in AB., bababākurvant. The accentuation, where shown, is
like that of a verb-form with accompanying prefix.
b. Further, combinations with √kṛ of utterances used at the sacrifice, and mostly ending in
ā: thus, svā́hā, svadhā́, svagā́; also váṣaṭ. In these, too, the accentuation is generally that of a
verb with prefix: e. g. svagākaróti (ÇB.; but svadhā́ karóti [?] TA.), vaṣaṭkuryā́t (MS.); and, with
another prefix, anuváṣaṭkaroti (ÇB.).
c. An instance or two also occur of ordinary words in such combinations, put in
corresponding form: thus, çūlā́ kuryāt (ÇB.) may roast on a spit  (çū́la) ; anṛṇākartos (AB.) of
getting clear of debt; āikyābhāvayant (AA.) uniting.
1092. a. The noun namas obeisance, homage, in a still more purely noun-value, becomes
combined with √kṛ: in the Veda, only with the gerund, in namaskṛ́tya (beside hastagṛ́hya and
karṇagṛ́hya: above, 990 b).
b. A solitary combination with √i go is shown by the accusative ástam home; which,
appearing only in ordinary phrases in RV., is in AV. compounded with the participles — in
astaṁyánt, astameṣyánt, ástamita (with accent like that of ordinary compounds with a prefix) —
and in the Brāhmaṇas and the later language is treated quite like a prefix: thus, astaméti (ÇB.).
c. Other ordinary accusative forms of adjectives in combination with verbal derivatives of kṛ
and bhū are found here and there in the older language: thus, çṛtaṁkṛ́tya and nagnaṁkṛ́tya
(TS.); nagnambhā́vuka, pāmanambhā́vuka etc. (TS. et al.); ánaruṣkaroti (ÇB.).
1093. In the early but not in the earliest language, a noun-stem thus compounded with kṛ or
bhū (and very rarely with as), in verbal nouns and ordinary derivatives, and then also in verbal
forms, begins to assume a constant ending ī (of doubtful origin).
a. There is no instance of this in RV., unless the ī of akkhalīkṛ́tya (above, 109l a) is to be so
explained. In AV., besides the obscure

vātī́kṛta and vātīkārá, is found only phalīkáraṇa. In the Brāhmaṇa language, examples begin to
occur more often: thus, in TS., çyetī́, mithunī́, muṣṭī; in TB., further, phalī́, krūrī́, udvāsī; in ÇB.,
besides some of these, also ekī́, kālvālī́, tīvrī, daridrī, brāhmaṇī, mithunī́, svī́; and açvābhidānī́, of
which (as of muṣṭī) the ī might be that of an ordinary grammatical form; in K., dvī; in GB.,
pravaṇī; in ṢB., vajrī; in AB., matī (from matya). From Upanishad and Sūtra are to be added
dvāitī (MU.), samī (KÇS.), navī and kuçalī (AGS.). The accent is in general like that of the
similar combinations treated above (1091): e. g. krūrīkurvánti, svīkṛ́tya, brāhmaṇībhū́ya,
mithunībhávantyāu, phalī́kartavāí, krūrī́kṛta; but sometimes a mere collocation takes place: thus,
mithunī́ bhávantīs (TS.), phalī́ kriyámāṇānām (TB.), vajrī́ bhūtvā́ (TA.). The ī is variously treated:
now as an uncombinable final, as in çyetī́ akuruta and mithunī́ abhavan (TS.); now as liable to
the ordinary conversions, as in mithuny ènaya syām, mithuny ā̀bhiḥ syām, and svyàkurvata
(ÇB.).
b. Out of such beginnings has grown in the later language the following rule:
1094. Any noun or adjective stem is liable to be compounded with verbal forms or
derivatives of the roots √ kṛ and भू bhū (and of अस् as also; but such cases are extremely rare),
in the manner of a verbal prefix. If the final of the stem be an a- or i-vowel, it is changed to ई
ī; if an u-vowel, it is changed to ऊ ū.
a. Examples are: stambhībhavati becomes a post; ekacittībhūya becoming of one mind;
upahārīkaroṣi thou makest an offering; , nakhaprahārajarjarīkṛta torn to pieces with blows of the
claws; çithilībhavanti become loose; kuṇḍalīkṛta ring-shaped; surabhīkṛta made fragrant;
ādhīkaraṇa pawning; ṛjūkṛtya straightening; hetūkaraṇa taking as cause . As in the case of the
denominatives (1059 c), the combinations with a-stems are the immense majority, and occur
abundantly (hardly less than a thousand are quotable) in the later language, but for the most
part only once or twice each; those made with i- and u-stems are a very small number. In a
few instances, stems in an and as, with those finals changed to ī, are met with: e. g. ātmī-kṛ,
yuvī-bhū; unmanī-kṛ, amanī-bhū; final ya after a consonant is contracted to ī: e. g. kāṅsī-kṛ; and
anomalous cases like kāṁdiçī-bhū occur. Final ṛ is said to become rī, but no examples are
quotable. The combinations with kṛ are about twice as frequent as those with bhū, and
examples with as do not appear to have been brought to light.
b. Similar combinations are occasionally made with elements of questionable or altogether
obscure character: e. g. urarī-kṛ, urī-kṛ.
c. Examples are not altogether wanting in the later language of ā as

final of the compounded noun-stem (cf. 1091): thus, duḥkhā-kṛ, niṣkulā-kṛ, çambā-kṛ, and one or
two others.
1095. Of all the forms which constitute or are attached to the verbal system, the passive
participle is the one most closely assimilated in its treatment as a combinable element to an
ordinary adjective. Next to it come the gerund and the gerundives. Combinations of the kind
above treated of are quite common with passive participles and gerunds.
CHAPTER XVI.
INDECLINABLES.
1096. The indeclinable words are less distinctly divided into separate parts of speech in
Sanskrit than is usual elsewhere in Indo-European language — especially owing to the fact that
the class of prepositions hardly has a real existence, but is represented by certain adverbial
words which are to a greater or less extent used prepositionally. They will, however, be briefly
described here under the usual heads.
Adverbs.
1097. Adverbs by Suffix. Classes of adverbs, sometimes of considerable extent, are formed
by the addition of adverb-making suffixes especially to pronominal roots or stems, but also to
noun and adjective stems.
a. There is no ultimate difference between such suffixes and the case-endings in declension;
and the adverbs of this division sometimes are used in the manner of cases.
1098. With the suffix tas are made adverbs having an ablative sense, and not rarely also an
ablative construction. Such are made:
a. From pronominal roots, in átas, itás, tátas, yátas, kútas, amútas, svatas (not found
earlier); from the pronominal stems in t or

d (494) of the personal pronouns: thus, mattás (only example in V.), tvattas, asmattas,
yuṣmattas; and from pronominal derivatives: thus, itarátas, katarátas.
b. From noun and adjective stems of every class, since the earliest period, but more freely
later: e. g. mukhatás, agratás, ṛbhutás, ṛktás, hṛttás, çīrṣatás, janmatas, nastás, yajuṣṭas,
pārátas, anyátas, anyatarátas, sarvátas, dakṣiṇatás, abhīpatás (once, in RV., from a case-form:
patsutás).
c. From a few prepositions: thus, abhítas, parítas, ántitas.
d. Examples of ablative construction are: áto bhū́yaḥ (RV.) more than that; tátaḥ ṣaṣṭhā́t
(AV.) from that sixth; áto ‘nyéna (ÇB.) with any other than this; sarvato bhayāt (AGS.) from all
fear; kutaç cid deçād āgatya (H.) arriving from some region or other;  purād itaḥ (R.) from this
city; tasmāt pretakāyataḥ (KSS.) from that dead body .
e. But the distinctive ablative meaning is not infrequently effaced, and the adverb has a
more general, especially a locative, value: thus, agratás in front; asmatsamīpatas in our
presence; dharmatas in accordance with duty;  chāgatas (H.) with reference to the goat; guṇato
‘dhikaḥ (M.) superior in virtue.
1099. With the suffix tra (in the older language often trā) are made adverbs having a
locative sense, and occasionally also a locative construction.
a. These adverbs are very few, compared with those in tas. They are formed chiefly from
pronominal stems, and from other stems having a quasi-pronominal character: namely, in tra,
átra, tátra, yátra, kútra, amútra, anyátra, viçvátra, sarvátra, ubhayátra, aparatra, uttaratra,
itarátra, anyataratra, pūrvatra, paratra, samānátra, ekatra, anekatra, ekāikatra; in trā, asmatrā́,
satrā́, purutrā́, bahutrā́, dakṣiṇatrā́. But a few in trā come from ordinary nouns: thus, devatrā́,
martyatrā́, puruṣatrā́, manuṣyatrā́, pākatrā́, çayutrā́, kurupañcālatrā́. 
Those 
in trā are
distinguished from the others by their accent.
b. Examples of locative construction are: hásta ā́ dakṣiṇatrā́  (RV.) in the right hand; yátrā́
’dhi (RV.) in which; ekatra puruṣe (MBh.) in a single man; atra mārātmake (H.) in this
murderous creature; prabhutvaṁ tatra yujyate (H.) sovereignty befits him. And, as the locative
case is used also to express the goal of motion (304), so the adverbs in tra have sometimes an
accusative as well as a locative value: thus, tatra gaccha go there or thither; pathó devatrā́
yā́nān (RV.) roads that go to the gods .
1100. One or two other suffixes of locality are:
a. ha, in ihá here, kúha where? and the Vedic viçváha (also viçváhā, viçvā́hā) always
(compare below, 1104b); and ihá (like átra etc.:

1099 b) is sometimes used with locative-case value: e. g. iha samaye (H.) at this conjuncture.
b. tāt, which is added to words having already a local or directive value: thus, to adverbial
accusatives, prā́ktāt, údaktāt, tā́vattāt; to adverbial ablatives, ārā́ttāt, uttarā́ttāt, parākā́ttāt; and
to prepositional adverbs, paçcā́tāt, adhā́stāt, avástāt, parástāt, purástāt, bahíṣṭāt. Apparently by
analogy with these last, the suffix has the form stāt in upáriṣṭāt (and BhP. has udastāt).
c. hi, in uttarā́hi (ÇB.) and dakṣiṇāhi (not quotable).
1101. By the suffix thā are made adverbs of manner, especially from pronominal roots or
stems.
a. Thus, táthā, yáthā; kathā́ and itthā́ (by the side of which stand kathám and itthám; and
ÇB. has itthā́t); and the rare imáthā and amúthā. And átha (V. often áthā) so then doubtless
belongs with them. Further, from a few adjective and noun stems, mostly of quasi-pronominal
character: 
thus, viçváthā, sarváthā, anyáthā, ubhayáthā, aparathā, itaráthā, yataráthā,
yatamáthā, katarathā, katamathā, pūrváthā, pratnáthā, ūrdhváthā, tiraçcáthā, ekathā (JB.),
ṛtuthā́, nāmáthā (once, AV.); and eváthā.
b. Yáthā becomes usually toneless in V., when used in the sense of iva after a noun forming
the subject of comparison: thus, tāyávo yathā (RV.) like thieves.
1102. One or two other suffixes of manner are:
a . ti, in íti thus, very commonly used, from the earliest period, especially as particle of
quotation, following the words quoted.
b. Examples are: brahmajāyé ’yám íti céd ávocan (RV.) if they have said "this is a
Brahman's wife"; táṁ devā́ abruvan vrā́tya kíṁ nú tiṣṭasī́ ’ti  (AV.) the gods said to him: Vrātya,
why do you stand?" Often, the iti is used more pregnantly: thus, yáḥ çraddádhāti sánti devā́ íti
(AV.) whoever has faith that the gods exist;  taṁ vyāghram munir mūṣiko ‘yam iti paçyati  (H.)
the sage looks upon that tiger as being really a mouse;  yūyaṁ kim iti sīdatha  (H.) why (lit.
alleging what reason) do you sit?
c. But iti is sometimes used in a less specialized way, to mark an onomatopœia, or to
indicate a gesture: e. g. bahíṣ ṭe astu bā́l íti  (AV.) let it come out of you with a splash;  íty ágre
kṛṣáty áthé ’ti (ÇB.) he ploughs first this way, then this way;  or it points forward to something
to be said: e. g. yan nv ity āhur anyāni chandāṅsi varṣīyāṅsi kasmād bṛhaty ucyata iti  (PB.)
when now they say thus: "the other metres are greater; why is the  bṛhatī spoken?" It also
makes a number of derivatives and compounds: e. g. ititha the so-many-eth; itivat in this
fashion; ityartham for this purpose; itihāsa a story or legend (lit. thus forsooth it was). As to
the use of a nominative with iti as predicate to an accusative, see 268 b.

d. With the suffix of íti is to be compared that of táti etc. (519). The word is abbreviated to
ti two or three times in ÇB.
e . va in iva (toneless) like, as, and evá (in V. often evā́), earlier thus, later a particle
emphasizing the preceding word; for thus is used later the related evám, which hardly occurs
in RV., and in AV. only with √vid: as, evám vidvā́n knowing thus.
f. In later Vedic (AV. etc., and the later parts of RV.) iva more often counts for only a single
syllable, ’va.
1103. a. By the suffix dā are made adverbs of time, but almost only from pronominal roots.
b. Thus, tadā́, yadā́, kadā́ (in RV. also kádā) , idā́ (only in V.); and sádā, beside which is
found earlier sádam. Besides these, in the older language, only sarvadā́; later a few others,
anyadā, ekadā, nityadā. A quasi-locative case use is seen occasionally in such phrases as
kadācid divase (R.) on a certain day .
c. By the perhaps related dānīm are made idā́nīm, tadā́nīm, viçvadā́nīm, tvadānīm (toneless).
Viçvadā́ni occurs as adjective in TB.
d. With rhi are made, from pronominal roots, tárhi, etárhi, yárhi, kárhi, amúrhi.
e. The suffix di, found only in yádi if, is perhaps related with dā, in form as in meaning.
Sadadí (MS.) is of doubtful character.
1104. By the suffix dhā are formed adverbs especially from numerals, signifying - fold, times,
ways, etc.
a. Thus, ekadhā́, dvidhā́ (also dvídhā and dvedhā́) , trídhā (in the older language usually
tredhā́), ṣaḍḍhā́ (also ṣoḍhā́ and ṣaḍdhā), dvādaçadhā́, ekānnaviṅçatidhā́, sahasradhā́, and so on.
Also, naturally, from words having a quasi-numeral character: thus, anekadhā, katidhā́, tatidhā́,
bahudhā́, purudhā́, viçvádhā, çaçvadhā́, aparimitadhā, yāvaddhā́, etāvaddhā́, māsadhā. In a very
few cases, also from general noun and adjective stems: thus, mitradhā́ (AV.), priyadhā́ (TS.;
predhā́, MS.), ṛjudhā́ (TB.), urudhā and citradhā (BhP.); and from one adverb, bahirdhā́.
b. The particle ádha or ádhā, a Vedic equivalent of átha, probably belongs here ( purudhá
and viçvádha, with shortened final, occur a few times in RV.); also addhā́ in truth; and perhaps
sahá with, which has an equivalent sadha- in several Vedic compounds. And the other adverbs
in ha (1100 a) may be of like origin.
1105. From a few numerals are made multiplicative adverbs with s: namely, dvís, trís, and
catúr (probably, for catúrs): 489 a.
a. The corresponding word for once, sakṛ́t, is a compound rather than a derivative; and the
same character belongs still more evidently to pañcakṛ́tvas, navakṛ́tvas, aparimitakṛ́tvas, etc.,
though kṛt and kṛtvas are regarded by the native grammarians as suffixes; the earlier

texts (AV. ÇB. MS.) have saptá kṛ́tvas, dáça kṛ́tvas, dvā́daça kṛ́tvas, aṣṭā́v evá kṛ́tvas, etc. AB.
has the redundant combination triṣ kṛtvah.
b. The quasi-suffix dyus, from a case-form of div day, is in a similar manner added to
various determining-words, generally made to end in e: e. g. anyedyús another day, ubhayedyus
(AV. -yadyús) on either day, pūrvedyús the day before.
1106. By the suffix çás are made, especially from numeral or quantitative stems, many
adverbs of quantity or measure or manner, generally used distributively.
a. Examples are: ekaçás one by one, çataçás by hundreds, ṛtuçás season by season, pacchas
foot by foot, akṣaraçás syllable by syllable, gaṇaçás in crowds, stambaçás by bunches, paruççás
limb by limb, tāvacchás in such and such number or quantity:  and, in a more general way,
sarvaçás wholly, mukhyaças principally, kṛchraças stingily, manmaçás as minded.
1107. By the suffix vát are made with great freedom, in every period of the language,
adverbs signifying after the manner of, like, etc.
a. Thus, an̄girasvát like Angiras, manuṣvát (RV.) as Manu did, jamadagnivát after the
manner of Jamadagni; pūrvavát or pratnavát or purāṇavát, as of old, kākatālīyavat after the
fashion of the crow and the palm-fruit.
b. This is really the adverbially used accusative (with adverbial shift of accent: below, 1111
g) of the suffix vant ( 1233 f), which in the Veda makes certain adjective compounds of a
similar meaning: thus, tvā́vant like thee, mā́vant of my sort, etc.
1108. By the suffix sāt are made from nouns quasi-adverbs signifying in or into the
condition or the possession of what is indicated by the noun; they are used only with verbs of
being, of becoming, and of making: namely, oftenest kṛ and bhū, but also as, gam, yā, and nī
(and, according to the grammarians, sam-pad). Some twenty-five examples are quotable from
the later literature; but none from the earlier, which also appears to contain nothing that casts
light upon the origin of the formation. The s of sāt is not liable to conversion into ṣ. The
connection with the verb is not so close as to require the use of the gerund in ya instead of
that in tvā (990); and other words are sometimes interposed between the adverb and verb.
a. Examples are: sarvakarmāṇi bhasmasāt kurute (MBh.) reduces all deeds to ashes; loko
‘yam dasyusād bhaved 
(MBh.) this world would become a prey to barbarians;  yasya
brāhmaṇasāt sarvaṁ vittam āsīt (MBh.) whose whole property was given to Brahmans ; niyataṁ
bhasmasād yāti (Har.) it is inevitably reduced to ashes;  agnīn ātmasāt kṛtvā (Y.) having taken
the fires to one's self.
1109. a. Suffixes, not of noun-derivation or of inflection, may be traced with more or less
plausibility in a few other adverbs. Thus, for

example, in prātár early, and sanutár away; in dakṣiṇít with right hand, and cikitvít with
consideration; in nūnám now, and nānānám variously. But the cases are in the main too rare
and doubtful to be worth notice here.
b. In the epics begin to be found a small class (about a dozen are quotable) of adverbs
having the form of a repeated noun-stem with its first occurrence ending in ā and its second in
i: e. g. hastāhasti hand to hand, rathārathi chariot against chariot, karṇākarṇi ear to ear.
c. The adverbs thus far described are almost never used prepositionally. Those of the next
division, however, are in many instances so used.
1110. Case-forms used as Adverbs. A large number of adverbs are more or less evidently
cases in form, made from stems which are not otherwise in use. Also many cases of known
stems, pronominal or noun or adjective, are used with an adverbial value, being distinguished
from proper cases by some difference of application, which is sometimes accompanied by an
irregularity of form.
1111. The accusative is the case most frequently and widely used adverbially. Thus:
a. Of pronominal stems: as, yád if, when, that, etc.; tád then etc.; kím why, whether, etc.;
idám now, here; adás yonder; and so on. Of like value, apparently, are the (mostly Vedic)
particles kád, kám and kam (?), íd, cid (common at every period), smád and sumád, īm and
sīm (by some regarded as still possessing pronoun-value), - kīm. Compounds with íd are céd if ,
néd lest, éd, svid, kuvíd; with cid, kū́cid; with -kīm, nákīm and mā́kīm and ā́kīm.
b. Of noun-stems: as, nā́ma by name; súkham happily; kā́mam at will, if you please; náktam
by night; ráhas secretly; oṣám quickly (V.); and so on.
c. Of adjective stems, in unlimited numbers: as, satyám truly; cirám long; pū́rvam formerly;
nítyam constantly; bhū́yas more, again; viçrabdham confidently; prakāçam openly; and so on.
d. The neuter singular is the case commonly employed in this way; and it is so used
especially as made from great numbers of compound adjective stems, often from such as hardly
occur, or are not at all found, in adjective use. Certain of these adverbial compounds, having an
indeclinable as prior member, are made by the Hindu grammarians a special class of
compounds, called avyayībhāva (1313).
e. But the feminine singular also is sometimes used, especially in the so-called adverbial
endings of comparison, tarām and tamām, which are attached to particles (cf. 1119), and even
(473 c) to verb-forms:

e. g. natarā́m, kathaṁtarām, uccaistarā́m, çanāistarām, jyoktamā́m. In the oldest language (RV.
and AV.), the neuter instead of the feminine form of these suffixes is almost alone in use: see
1119.
f. Many adverbs of obscure form or connection are to be explained with probability as
accusatives of obsolete noun or adjective stems: examples are tūṣṇī́m in silence; sāyám at
evening; sākám together, with (prep.); áram or álam sufficient (in the later language used with
√kṛ in the manner of a prefix: 1078 a); prāyas usually; īṣát somewhat; amnás unexpectedly;
bahís outside; míthu and mithás, múhu and múhus, jā́tu, and so on. Madrík etc., and niṇík (in
RV.), are perhaps contracted forms of adjectives having √ac or añc as their final (407 ff.). The
presence of other roots as final members is also probable for uçádhak, ānuṣák and āyuṣák,
anuṣṭhú and suṣṭhú, yugapát, etc. Compare also the forms in am beside those in ā, above, 1101
a, 1102 e, 1103 b.
g. In (Vedic) dravát quickly is to be seen a change of accent for the adverbial use (pple
drávant running); and drahyát stoutly (RV., once) may be another example. The comparative
and superlative suffixes (above, e) show a like change; and it is also to be recognized in the
derivatives with vát (1107).
1112. The instrumental is also often used with adverbial value: generally in the singular, but
sometimes also in the plural. Thus:
a. Of pronominal stems: as, enā́ and ayā́, káyā, anā́, amā́, amuyā́.
b. Of noun-stems: as, kṣaṇena instantly; açeṣeṇa completely; viçeṣeṇa especially; dívā by
day; diṣṭyā fortunately; sáhasā suddenly; aktubhis by night; and so on.
c. Of adjectives, both neuter (not distinguishable from masculine) and feminine: as, akhilena
wholly; prāyeṇa mostly; dákṣiṇena to the south; úttareṇa to the north; ántareṇa within; ciréṇa
long; — çánāis and çánakāis slowly; uccāís on high; nīcāis below; parācāís afar; táviṣībhis
mightily; and so on.
d. More doubtful cases, mostly from the older language, may be instanced as follows:
tiraçcátā, devátā, bāhúta, and sasvártā (all RV.), homonymous instrumentals from nouns in tā;
dvitā́, tādī́tnā, īrmā́, mṛṣā́, vṛ́thā, sácā, asthā́ (?), mudhā (not V.), adhunā́ (B. and later).
e. Adverbially used instrumentals are (in the older language), oftener than any other case,
distinguished from normal instrumentals by differences of form: thus, especially, by an irregular
accent: as, amā́ and dívā (given above); perhaps gúhā; apākā́, āsayā́, kuhayā́ (?); naktayā́,
svapnayā́, samanā́; adatrayā́, ṛtayā́, ubhayā́, sumnayā́ (?); daksinā́, madhyā́; nīcā́, prācā́, uccā́,
paçcā́, tiraçcā́; vasántā; — in a few u-stems, by a y inserted before the ending, which is
accented: thus, amuyā́ (given above), āçuyā́, sādhuyā́, raghuyā́, dhṛṣṇuyā́, anuṣ-

ṭhuyā́-, mithuyā́; — and urviyā́ (for urvyā́) and víçvyā (properly víçvayā) are more slightly
irregular.
1113. The dative has only very seldom an adverbial use.
a. Examples are aparā́ya for the future (RV.; with changed accent); cirāya long; arthāya for
the sake of; ahnāya presently.
1114. The ablative is not infrequently used adverbially. Thus:
a. Of pronominal stems: as, kásmāt why? akasmāt casually, unexpectedly; ā́t, tā́t, yā́t (V.:
normal forms, instead of the pronominal asmāt etc.).
b. Of noun-stems: as, āsā́t near; ārā́t afar; balāt forcibly; kutūhalāt emulously; sakāçāt on
the part of.
c. Oftenest, of adjective stems: as, dūrā́t afar; nīcā́t below; paçcā́t behind; sākṣā́t plainly,
actually; samantāt completely; acirāt not long; pratyakṣatamāt (AB.) most obviously; pratyantāt
(S.) to the end.
d. In a few instances, adverbially used ablatives likewise show a changed accent in the early
language: thus, apākā́t from afar; amā́t from near by; sanā́t from of old (but instr. sánā);
uttarā́t from the north; adharā́t below.
1115. The genitive is almost never used adverbially.
a. In the older language occur aktós by night, and vástos by day; later, cirasya long.
1116. The locative is sometimes used with adverbial value. Thus:
a. From noun and adjective stems: āké near; āré and dūré afar; abhisvaré behind; astamīké
at home; ṛté without (prep.); ágre in front; sthāne suitably; sapadi immediately; -arthe and -kṛte
(common in composition) for the sake of; aparī́ṣu in after time; ādāu first; rahasi in secret.
1117. Even a nominative form appears to be stereotyped into an adverbial value in (Vedic)
kís, interrogative particle, and its compounds nákis and mā́kis, negative particles. And masc.
nominatives 
from añc-stems 
(as parān̄ 
AB., nyān̄ Āpast.) are sometimes found used by
substitution for neuters.
1118. Verbal Prefixes and kindred words. The verbal prefixes, described in the preceding
chapter (1076 ff.), are properly adverbs, having a special office and mode of use in connection
with verbal roots and their more immediate derivatives.
a. Their occasional looser connection with the verb has been noticed above (1084). In the
value of general adverbs, however,

they only rarely occur (except as ápi has mainly changed its office from prefix to adverb or
conjunction in the later language); but their prepositional uses are much more frequent and
important: see below, 1125 b.
b. In composition with nouns, they (like other adverbial elements) not infrequently have an
adjective value: see below, 1281 ff., 1305.
1119. Several of the prefixes (as noticed above, 473–4) form comparative and superlative
adjectives, by the suffixes tara and tama, or ra and ma: thus, úttara and uttamá, ádhara and
adhamá, ápara and apamá, ávara and avamá, úpara and upamá, and prathamá is doubtless of
the same character; also, ántara and ántama. And accusatives of such derivative adjectives (for
the most part not otherwise found in use) have the value of comparatives, and rarely
superlatives, to the prefixes themselves: thus, sáṁitaṁ cit saṁtaráṁ sáṁ çiçādhi (AV.) whatever
is quickened do thou still further quicken; vitaráṁ ví kramasva (RV.) stride out yet more widely;
prá táṁ naya prataráṁ vásyo ácha  (RV.) lead him forward still further toward advantage;  úd
enam uttaráṁ naya (AV.) lead him up still higher.
a. Besides those instanced, are found also nitaráṁ, apataráṁ, abhitaráṁ, avataráṁ,
parātaráṁ, parastaráṁ. In the Brāhmaṇas and later (above, 1111 e), the feminine accusative is
used instead: thus, atitarā́m and atitamām, abhitarā́m, anutamā́m, ātamā́m, pratitarā́m, nitarā́m,
uttarā́m, pratarā́m and pratamā́m, vitarā́m, saṁtarā́m (also RV., once).
1120. Kindred in origin and character with the verbal prefixes, and used like them except in
composition with verbs, are a few other adverbs: thus, avás down; adhás below (and
adhastarā́m); parás far off (and parastarā́m); purā́ before; antarā́ (apparently, antár+ā́) among,
between; ánti near; upári above; and sahá (already mentioned, 1104b) along, with, and sácā
together, with, may be noticed with them. Vinā́ without, and viṣu- apart, appear to be related
with ví.
1121. Inseparable Prefixes. A small number of adverbial prefixes are found only in
combination with, other elements. Thus:
a. The negative prefix a or an — an before vowels, a before consonants.
b. It is combined especially with innumerable nouns and adjectives; much more rarely, with
adverbs, as akútra and ápunar (RV.), áneva (AV.), ánadhas (TB.), akasmāt, asakṛt; in rare cases,
also with pronouns (as atad, akiṁcit); and even, in the later language, now and then with
verbs, as aspṛhayanti (BhP. Çiç.) they do not desire , alokayati (SD.) he does not view. Now and
then it is prefixed to itself: e. g. anakāmamāra, anaviprayukta, anavadya (?).

c. In a very few cases, the negative a appears to be made long: thus, ā́sat non-existent,
ā́deva godless, ā́rāti enemy, āçāuca impurity, ā́tura ill (?).
d. The independent negative adverbs, ná and mā́, are only in exceptional instances used in
composition: see below, 1122e.
e. The comitative prefix sa, used instead of the preposition sám, and interchangeably with
sahá, before nouns and adjectives.
f. The prefix of dispraise dus ill, badly (identical with √duṣ: 225 a).
g. It is combined in the same manner as a or an. Of combinations with a verbal form, at
least a single example appears to be quotable: duçcaranti (R.) behave ill.
h. The corresponding laudatory prefix su well is in general so closely accordant in its use
with the preceding that it is best mentioned here, though it occurs not rarely as an
independent particle in the oldest language (in RV., more than two hundred times; in the
peculiar parts of AV., only fourteen times), and even occasionally later.
i. The particle su sometimes appears in B. and later before a verb-form, and considering its
rapid loss of independent use in V., and the analogy of a and dus (above, b, g) it is probably at
least in part to be regarded as in composition with the verb. The pada-text of AV. xix. 49. 10
reads su-ápāyati, but its testimony is of little or no value. K. has na su vijñāyete and na vāi su
viduḥ, and KeU. has su veda; TB. has susámbodháyati (?); MBh. and BhP. have sūpatasthe; R.
has suçakyante.
j. The exclamatory and usually depreciative prefixed forms of the interrogative pronoun (506)
are most analogous with the inseparable prefixes.
1122. Miscellaneous Adverbs. Other words of adverbial character and office, not clearly
referable to any of the classes hitherto treated, may be mentioned as follows:
a. Asseverative particles (in part, only in the older language): thus, an̄gá, hánta, kíla, khálu,
tú (rare in older language), vāí, vā́vá (in Brāhmaṇa language only), hi, hiná, u, áha, ha, gha,
samaha, sma, bhala.
b. Of these, hánta is a word of assent and incitement; hí has won also an illative meaning,
and accents the verb with which it stands in connection (595 e); sma sometimes appears to
give a past meaning to a present tense (778 b); u is often combined with the final a of other
particles: thus, átho, nó, mó, utó, úpo, pró; but also with that of verb-forms, as dattó, vidmó.
The final o thus produced is pragṛhya or uncombinable (138c). Particles of kindred value,
already mentioned above,

are íd, kám or kam, cid, jā́tu, evá. Some of the asseverative particles are much used in the
later artificial poetry with a purely expletive value, as devices to help make out the metre
(pādapūraṇa verse-fillers); so especially ha, hi, tu, sma.
c. Negative particles are: ná, signifying simple negation; mā́, signifying prohibition.
d. As to the construction of the verb with mā́, see above, 579. In the Veda, nú (or nū́: 248
a) has also sometimes a negative meaning. For the Vedic ná of comparison, see below, g, h.
e. In nahí, ná is combined with hí, both elements retaining their full meaning; also with íd
in néd lest. It is perhaps present in nanú and caná, but not in hiná (RV., once). In general,
neither ná nor mā́ is used in composition to make negative compounds, but, instead, the
inseparable negative prefix a or an (1121 a): exceptions are the Vedic particles nákis and
mā́kis, nákīm and mā́kīm; also naciram and mā́ciram, napuṅsaka, and, in the later language, a
number of others.
f. Interrogative particles are only those already given: kád, kim, kuvíd, svid, nanú, of which
the last introduces an objection or expostulation.
g. Of particles of comparison have been mentioned the toneless iva, and yathā (also toneless
when used in the same way). Of frequent occurrence in the oldest language is also ná, having
(without loss of accent) the same position and value as the preceding.
h. Examples of the ná of comparison are: ṛṣidvíṣa íṣuṁ ná sṛjata dvíṣam (RV.) let loose your
enmity like an arrow at the enemy of the singer; váyo ná vṛkṣám (AV.) as birds to the tree;
gāuró ná tṛṣitáḥ piba (RV.) drink like a thirsty buffalo. This use is generally explained as being
a modification or adaptation of the negative one: thus, [although, to be sure] not [precisely] a
thirsty buffalo; and so on.
i. Of particles of place, besides those already mentioned, may be noticed kvà where? (in V.,
always to be read kúa).
j. Particles of time are: nú now (also nū́: nūnám was mentioned above, 1109 a), adyá and
sadyás and sadívas (RV., once) today, at once (all held to contain the element div or dyu), hyás
yesterday, çvás tomorrow, jyók (also related with dyu) long; púnar again.
k. Of particles of manner, besides those already mentioned, may be noticed nā́nā variously
(for nānānám, its derivative, see 1109 a); sasvár (RV.) secretly.
l. In the above classifications are included all the Vedic adverbial words, and most of those
of the later language: for the rest, see the dictionaries.

Prepositions.
1123. There is, as already stated, no proper class of prepositions (in the modern sense of
that term), no body of words having for their prevailing office the "government" of nouns. But
many of the adverbial words indicated above are used with nouns in a way which approximates
them to the more fully developed prepositions of other languages.
a. If one and another of such words — as vinā, ṛte — occurs almost solely in prepositional
use, this is merely fortuitous and unessential.
1124. Words are thus used prepositionally along with all the noun-cases excepting the
dative. But in general their office is directive only, determining more definitely, or
strengthening, the proper case-use of the noun. Sometimes, however, the case-use is not easy to
trace, and the noun then seems to be more immediately "governed" by the preposition — that
is, to have its case-form more arbitrarily determined by its association with the latter. This is
oftenest true of the accusative; and also of the genitive, which has, here as elsewhere (294 b),
suffered an extension of its normal sphere of use.
1125. a. The adverbs by derivative form (1097 ff.) have least of a prepositional value
(exceptions are especially a few made with the suffix tas: 1098).
b. Most of the verbal prefixes (exceptions are ud, ni, parā, pra; and ava and vi are almost
such) have their prepositional or quasi-prepositional uses with cases; but much more widely in
the older time than in the later: in the classical language the usage is mainly restricted to
prati, anu, and ā.
c. Most of the directive words akin with the more proper prefixes are used prepositionally:
some of them — as saha, vinā, upari, antarā, purā — freely, earlier and later.
d. The case-forms used adverbially are in many instances used prepositionally also: oftenest,
as was to be expected, with the genitive; but frequently, and from an early time, with the
accusative; more rarely with other cases.
e. We will take up now the cases for a brief exposition, beginning with those that are least
freely used.
1126. The Locative. This case is least of all used with words that can claim the name of
preposition. Of directives, antár and its later derivative antarā́, meaning within, in, are oftenest
added to it, and in the classical language as well as earlier. Of frequent Vedic use with it are ā́
and ádhi: thus, mártyeṣv ā́ among mortals; pṛthivyā́m ádhy óṣadhīḥ the plants upon the earth;
téjo máyi dhārayā́ ’dhi (AV.) establish glory

in me; — ápi and úpa are much rarer: thus, yā́ apā́m ápi vraté [sánti] (RV.) who are in the
domain of the waters; amū́r yā́ úpa sū́rye [sánti] (RV.) who are up yonder in the sun;  — sácā
along with is not rare in RV., but almost entirely unknown later: thus, pitróḥ sácā satī́ staying
with her parents.
1127. The Instrumental. The directives used with this case are almost only those which
contain the associative pronominal root sa: as sahá (most frequent), sākám, sārdhám, samám,
samáyā, sarátham; and, in the Veda, the prefix sám: as, te sumatíbhiḥ sám pátnībhir ná vṛ́ṣaṇo
nasīmahi (RV.) may we be united with thy favors as men with their spouses . By substitution of
the instrumental for the ablative of separation (283 a), vinā without (not Vedic) takes
sometimes the instrumental; and so, in the Veda, avás down and parás beyond, with which the
ablative is also, and much more normally, construed. And ádhi, in RV., is used with the
instrumental snúnā and snúbhis, where the locative would be expected.
1128. The Ablative. In the prepositional constructions of the ablative (as was pointed out
and partly illustrated above, 293), the ablative value of the case, and the merely directive value
of the added particle, are for the most part clearly to be traced. Many of the verbal prefixes
are more or less frequently joined in the older language with this case: oftenest, ádhi and pári;
more sporadically, ánu, ápa, áva, práti, and the separatives nís and ví. The change of meaning
of the ablative with ā́ hither, by which it comes to fill the office of its opposite, the accusative,
was sufficiently explained above (293 c). Of directive words akin with the prefixes, many — as
bahís, purás, avás, adhás, parás, purā́, vinā, and tirás out of knowledge of — accompany this
case by a perfectly regular construction. Also the case-forms arvā́k, prā́k, paçcā́t, ūrdhvám,
pū́rvam, páram, 
and ṛté without, of which the natural construction with an ablative is
predominant earlier.
1129. The Accusative. Many of the verbal prefixes and related words take an accompanying
accusative. Most naturally (since the accusative is essentially the to-case), those that express a
motion or action toward anything: as abhí, práti, ánu, úpa, ā́, áti and ádhi in the sense of over
on to, or across, beyond, tirás through, antár and antarā́ when meaning between, pári around.
Examples are: yā́ḥ pradíço abhí sū́ryo vicáṣṭe  (AV.) what quarters the sun looks abroad unto;
ábodhy agníḥ práty āyatī́m uṣā́sam  (RV.) Agni has been awakened to meet the advancing dawn;
gacchet kadācit svajanam prati (MBh.) she might go somewhither to her own people;  imam
prakṣyāmi nṛpatim prati (MBh.) him I will ask with reference to the king;  máma cittám ánu
cittébhir é ’ta (AV.) follow after my mind with your minds;  é ’hy ā́ naḥ (AV.) come hither to us;
úpa na é ’hy arvā́n̄ (RV.) come hither unto us; yó devó mártyāṅ áti  (AV.) the god who is beyond
mortals; adhiṣṭhā́ya várcasā́ ’dhy anyā́n  (AV.) excelling above others in glory . Also abhítas and
parítas, which have a like value with the simple abhí and pári;

and upári above (oftener with genitive). Less accordant with ordinary accusative constructions
is the use of this case with adhas, paras, paras, vinā, beside other cases which seem more
suited to the meaning of those particles. And the same may be said of most of the adverbial
case-forms with which the accusative is used. Thus, a number of instrumental of situation or
direction: as yé ‘vareṇā ”dityám yé páreṇā ”dityám  (TB.) those who are below the sun, those
who are beyond the sun; ántareṇa yónim (ÇB.) within the womb; te hī ’dam antareṇa sarvam
(AB.) for all this universe is between them;  úttareṇa gā́rhapatyam (ÇB.) to the north of the
householder's fire; dákṣiṇena védim (ÇB.) to the south of the sacrificial hearth;  dakṣiṇena
vṛkṣavāṭikām (Ç.) to the right of the orchard;  nikaṣā́ yamunām (Har.) near the Yamunā.
Similarly, ūrdhvam and pūrvam have an accusative object as well as an ablative; and the same
is true later of ṛte. Abhimukham toward has a more natural right to construction with this case.
1130. The Genitive. The words which are accompanied by the genitive are mostly case-
forms of nouns, or of adjectives used substantively, retaining enough of the noun-character to
take this case as their natural adjunct. Such are the locatives agre in front of, abhyāçe near,
arthe and kṛte for the sake of, nimitte and hetāu by reason of, madhye in the midst of;  and
other cases, as arthāya, kāraṇāt, sakāçāt, hetos. And really, although less directly and
obviously, of the same character are other adjective cases (some of them showing other
constructions, already noticed): as adhareṇa, uttareṇa and uttarāt, dakṣiṇena and dakṣiṇāt,
paçcāt, ūrdhvam, anantaram, samakṣam, sākṣāt. More questionable, and illustrations rather of
the general looseness of use of the genitive, are its constructions (almost wholly unknown in
the oldest language) with more proper words of direction: thus, with the derivative paritas,
paratas, and antitas, and parastāt and purastāt (these found in the Brāhmaṇa language: as,
saṁvatsarasya parastāt after a year; sūktasya purastāt before the hymn [AB.]); with anti, adhas,
avas, puras; with upari above (common later); and with antar.
Conjunctions.
1131. The conjunctions, also, as a distinct class of words, are almost wanting.
a. The combination of clauses is in Sanskrit in general of a very simple character; much of
what in other Indo-European languages is effected by subordinating conjunctions is here
managed by means of composition of words, by the use of the gerunds (994), of iti (1102), of
abstract nouns in case-forms, and so on.
1132. The relative derivative adverbs, already given

(1098 ff.), may properly be regarded as conjunctions; and a few other particles of kindred
value, as céd and néd (1111 a).
1133. Purely of conjunctive value are च ca and, and वा vā or (both toneless, and never
having the first place in a sentence or clause).
a. Of copulative value, along with ca, is in the older language especially utá (later it
becomes a particle of more indefinite use); and ápi, tátas, táthā, kíṁ ca, with other particles
and combinations of particles, are used often as connective of clauses.
b. Adversative is tú but (rare in the older language); also, less strongly, u (toneless).
c. Of illative value is hí for (originally, and in great part at every period, asseverative only):
compare above, 1122 b.
d. To ca (as well as to its compound céd) belongs occasionally the meaning if.
e. It is needless to enter into further detail with regard to those uses which may be not
less properly, or more properly, called conjunctive than adverbial, of the particles already given,
under the head of Adverbs.
Interjections.
1134. The utterances which may be classed as interjections are, as in other languages, in
part voice-gestures, in part onomatopœias, and in part mutilations and corruptions of other
parts of speech.
1135. a. Of the class of voice-gestures are, for example: ā, hā, hāhā, ahaha, he, hāí (AV.),
ayi, aye, hayé (RV.), aho, báṭ (RV.), bata (RV.) or vata, and (probably) híruk and hurúk (RV.).
b. Onomatopoetic or imitative utterances are, for example (in the older language): ciçcā́
whiz (of an arrow: RV.); kikirā́ (palpitation: RV.); bā́l and pháṭ (pháṣ?) or phál splash (AV.);
bhúk bow-wow (AV.); çál pat (AV.); āṣ, hīṣ, as, and has (PB.); and see the words already
quoted in composition with the roots kṛ and bhū, above, 1091.
c. Nouns and adjectives which have assumed an interjectional character are, for example:
bhos (for the vocative bhavas, 456); are or re (voc. of ari enemy} ; dhik alas! (may be mere
voice-gesture, but perhaps related with √dih); kaṣṭam woe is me! diṣṭyā thank heaven! svasti
hail! suṣṭhu, sādhu good, excellent! None of these are Vedic in interjectional use.

CHAPTER XVII.
DERIVATION OF DECLINABLE STEMS.
1136. The formation from roots of conjugable stems — namely, tense-stems, mode-stems,
and stems of secondary conjugation (not essentially different from one another, nor, it is
believed, ultimately from the formation of declined stems) — was most conveniently treated
above, in the chapters devoted to the verb. Likewise the formation of adverbs by derivation (not
essentially different from case-formation), in the chapter devoted to particles. And the formation
of those declinable stems — namely, of comparison, and of infinitives and participles — which
attach themselves most closely to the systems of inflection, has also been more or less fully
exhibited. But the extensive and intricate subject of the formation of the great body of
declinable stems was reserved for a special chapter.
a. Of course, only a brief and compendious exhibition of the subject can be attempted within
the here necessary limits: no exhaustive tracing out of the formative elements of every period;
still less, a complete statement of the varied uses of each element; least of all, a discussion of
origins; but enough to help the student in that analysis of words which must form a part of his
labor from the outset, giving a general outline of the field, and preparing for more penetrating
investigation.
b. The material from accented texts, and especially the Vedic material, will be had
especially in view (nothing that is Vedic being intentionally left unconsidered); and the
examples given will be, so far as is possible, words found in such texts with their accent
marked. No word not thus vouched for will be accented unless the fact is specifically pointed
out.
1137. The roots themselves, both verbal and pronominal, are used in their bare form, or
without any added suffix, as declinable stems.
a. As to this use of verbal roots, see below, 1147.
b. The pronominal roots, so-called, are essentially declinable; and hence, in their further
treatment in derivation, they are throughout in accordance with other declinable stems, and not
with verbal roots.
1138. Apart from this, every such stem is made by a suffix. And these suffixes fall into two
general classes:

A. Primary suffixes, or those which are added directly to roots;
B. Secondary suffixes, or those which are added to derivative stems (also to pronominal
roots, as just pointed out, and sometimes to particles).
a. The division of primary suffixes nearly corresponds to the kṛt (more regular) and uṇādi
(less regular) suffixes of the Hindu grammarians; the secondary, to their taddhita-suffixes.
1139. But this distinction, though one of high value, theoretically and practically, is not
absolute. Thus:
a. Suffixes come to have the aspect and the use of primary which really contain a secondary
element — that is to say, the earliest words exhibiting them were made by addition of
secondary suffixes to words already derivative.
b. Sundry examples of this will he pointed out below: thus, the gerundival suffixes, tavya,
anīya, etc., the suffixes uka and aka, tra, and others. This origin is probable for more cases
than admit of demonstration; and it is assumable for others which show no distinct signs of
composition.
c. Less often, a suffix of primary use passes over in part into secondary, through the
medium of use with denominative "roots" or otherwise: examples are yu, iman, īyas and iṣṭha,
ta.
1140. Moreover, primary suffixes are added not only to more original roots, but, generally
with equal freedom, to elements which have come to wear in the language the aspect of such,
by being made the basis of primary conjugation — and even, to a certain extent, to the bases of
secondary conjugation, the conjugation-stems, and the bases of tense-inflection, the tense-stems.
a. The most conspicuous examples of this are the participles, present and future and
perfect, which are made alike from tense and conjugation-stems of every form. The infinitives
(968 ff.) attach themselves only in sporadic instances to tense-stems, and even from
conjugation-stems are made but sparingly earlier; and the same is true of the gerundives.
b. General adjectives and nouns are somewhat widely made from conjugation-stems,
especially from the base of causative conjugation: see below the suffixes a (1148 j, k), ā (1149
c, d), ana (1150 m), as (1151 f), ani (1159 b), u (1178 g–i), ti (1157 g), tṛ (1182 e), tnu (1196
b), snu (1194 b), uka (1180 d), āku (1181 d), ālu (1192 b), tu (1161 d).

c. From tense-stems the examples are far fewer, but not unknown: thus, from present-stems,
occasional derivatives in a (1148 j), ā (1149 d, e), ana (1150 n), i (1155 d), u (1178 f), ta
(1176 e), tu (1161 d), uka (1180 d), tra (1185 e), ti (1157 g), vin (or in: 1232 b, 1183 a); from
stems in a s apparently of aoristic character (besides infinitives and gerundives), occasional
derivatives in a (1148 j), ana (1150 j), ani (1159 b), an (1160 a), āna (1175), as (1151 c), ī
(1156 b), iṣṭha (1184 a), u (1178 f), us (1154 a), tṛ (1182 e), in (1183 a).
1141. The primary suffixes are added also to roots as compounded with the verbal prefixes.
a. Whatever, namely, may have been originally and strictly the mode of production of the
derivatives with prefixes, it is throughout the recorded life of the language as if the root and its
prefix or prefixes constituted a unity, from which a derivative is formed in the same manner as
from the simple root, with that modification of the radical meaning which appears also in the
proper verbal forms as compounded with the same prefixes.
b. Not derivatives of every kind are thus made; but, in the main, those classes which have
most of the verbal force, or which are most akin in value with infinitives and participles.
c. The occurrence of such derivatives with prefixes, and their accent, will be noted under
each suffix below. They are chiefly (in nearly the order of their comparative frequency), besides
root-stems, those in a, in ana, in ti, in tar and tra, and in in, ya, van and man, i and u, as, and
a few others.
1142. The suffixes of both classes are sometimes joined to their primitives by a preceding
union-vowel — that is to say, by one which wears that aspect, and, in our ignorance or
uncertainty as to its real origin, may most conveniently and safely be called by that name. The
line between these vowels and those deserving to be ranked as of organic suffixal character
cannot be sharply drawn.
Each of the two great classes will now be taken up by itself, for more particular
consideration.
A. Primary Derivatives.
1143. Form of root. The form of root to which a primary suffix is added is liable to more or
less variation. Thus:
a. By far the most frequent is a strengthening change, by guṇa- or vṛddhi-increment. The
former may occur under all circumstances (except, of course, where guṇa-change is in general
forbidden: 235, 240): thus, véda from √vid, móda from √mud, várdha from √vṛdh;

áyana from √i, sávana from √su, sáraṇa from √sṛ; and so on. But the latter is only allowed
under such circumstances as leave long ā as the resulting vowel: that is to say, with non-final
a, and with a final i- or u-vowel and ṛ before a vowel: thus, nādá from √nad, grābhá from √gṛbh
or grabh, vāhá from √vah, nāyá from √nī, bhāvá from √bhū, kārá from √kṛ; such strengthening
as would make vāida and māuda does not accompany primary derivation.
b. Strengthening in derivation does not stand in any such evident connection with accent as
strengthening in conjugation; nor can any general rules be laid down as to its occurrence; it
has to he pointed out in detail for each suffix. So also with other vowel-changes, which are in
general accordance with those found in inflection and in the formation of tense- and mode-
stems.
c. The reversion of a final palatal or h to a guttural has been already noticed (216). A final
n or m is occasionally lost, as in formations already considered.
d. After a short final vowel is sometimes added a t: namely, where a root is used as stem
without suffix (1147 d), and before a following y or v of van (1169), vara and varī (1171), yu
once (1165 a), and ya (1213 a). The presence of t before these suffixes appears to indicate an
original secondary derivation from derivatives in ti and tu.
e. The root is sometimes reduplicated: rarely in the use without suffix (1147 c,e); oftenest
before a (1148 k), i (1155 e), u (1178 d); but also before other suffixes, as ā (1149 e), ana
(1150 m), vana (1170 a), van and varī (1169 d, 1171 a,b), vani (1170 b), vi (1193), vit (1193
b), ani (1159 b), in (1183 a), tnu (1196 a), ta (1176 a), ti (1157 d), tha (1163 a), tṛ (1182 b),
tra (1185 f), ūka (1180 f), aka (1181 a), īka (1186 c), ma (1166 b).
1144. Accent. No general laws governing the place of the accent are to be recognized; each
suffix must in this respect be considered by itself.
a. In connection with a very few suffixes is to be recognized a certain degree of tendency to
accent the root in case of a nomen actionis or infinitival derivative, and the ending in the case
of a nomen agentis or participial derivative: see the suffixes a, ana, as, an, and man, below,
where the examples are considered. Differences of accent in words made by the same suffix are
also occasionally connected with differences of gender: see the suffixes as and man.
1145. Meaning. As regards their signification, the primary derivatives fall in general into
two great classes, the one indicating the action expressed by the verbal root, the other the
person or thing in which the action appears, the agent or actor — the latter, either
substantively or adjectively. The one class is more abstract, infinitival; the other is more
concrete, participial. Other meanings

may in the main be viewed as modifications or specializations of these two.
a. Even the words indicating recipience of action, the passive participles, are, as their use
also as neuter or reflexive shows, only notably modified words of agency. The gerundives are,
as was pointed out above (961 ff.), secondary derivatives, originally indicating only concerned
with the action.
1146. But these two classes, in the processes of formation, are not held sharply apart. There
is hardly a suffix by which action-nouns are formed which does not also make agent-nouns or
adjectives; although there are not a few by which are made only the latter. In treating them in
detail below, we will first take up the suffixes by which derivatives of both classes are made,
and then those forming only agent-nouns.
a. To facilitate the finding of the different suffixes is given the following list of them, in
their order as treated, with references to paragraphs:
—
1147
yu
1165
in
1183
a
1148
ma
1166
īyas, iṣṭha
1184
ā
1149
mi
1167
tra
1185
ana
1150
man
1168
ka
1186
as
1151
van
1169
ya
1187
tas, nas, sas
1152
vana, -ni, -nu
1170
ra
1188
is
1153
vara
1171
la
1189
us
1154
ant
1172
va
1190
i
1155
vāṅs
1173
ri
1191
ī
1156
māna
1174
ru
1192
ti
1157
āna
1175
vi
1193
ni
1158
ta
1176
snu
1194
ani
1159
na, ina, una
1177
sna
1195
an
1160
u
1178
tnu
1196
tu
1161
ū
1179
sa
1197
nu
1162
uka
1180
asi
1198
tha
1163
aka
1181
abha
1199
thu
1164
tṛ or tar
1182
sundries
1200–1
1147. Stems without suffix; Root-words. These words and their uses have been already
pretty fully considered above (323, 348 ff., 383 ff., 400, 401).
a. They are used especially (in the later language, almost solely) as finals of compounds, and
have both fundamental values, as action-nouns (frequently as infinitives: 971), and as agent-
nouns and adjectives (often governing an accusative: 271 e). As action-nouns, they are chiefly
feminines (384; in many instances, however, they do not occur in situations that determine the
gender).

b. In a small number of words, mostly of rare occurrence, the reduplicated root is used
without suffix.
c. The Vedic cases are: with simple reduplication, sasyád, cikít, dadṛ́h, didyú and didyút,
juhū́, and perhaps gán̄gā and çíçu; with intensive reduplication, -nenī́, malimluc, yavīyúdh, and
jógū and vánīvan (with the intensive instead of the usual radical accent). In dáridra is seen a
transfer to the a-declension. Asūsū́ is probably to be understood as a compound, asū-sū́.
d. If the root end in a short vowel, a t is regularly and usually added (383f–h).
e. Examples have been given at the place just quoted. In jágat the t is added to the
mutilated form of √gam reduplicated, and ṛṇayā́t (TS., once) appears to put it after a long
vowel. In a single instance, çrútkarṇa (RV.) of listening ears, a stem of this class occurs as
prior member of a compound.
f. Words of this form in combination with verbal prefixes are very numerous. The accent
rests (as in combination of the same with other preceding elements) on the root-stem.
g. A few exceptions in point of accent occur: thus, ávasā, úpastut; and, with other
irregularities of form, párijri, upástha, uparístha.
1148. अ a. With the suffix अ a is made an immensely large and heterogeneous body of
derivatives, of various meaning and showing various treatment of the root: guṇa-strengthening,
vṛddhi-strengthening, retention unchanged, and reduplication.
In good part, they are classifiable under the two usual general heads; but in part they have
been individualized into more special senses.
1. a. With guṇa-strengthening of the root (where that is possible: 235, 240). These are the
great majority, being more than twice as numerous as all others together.
b. 
Many nomina actionis: 
as, çráma weariness, gráha seizure, áya movement, véda
knowledge, háva call, kródha wrath, jóṣa enjoyment, tára crossing, sárga emission.
C. Many nomina agentis: as, kṣamá patient, svajá constrictor, jīvá living, meghá cloud, codá
inciting, plavá boat, sará brook, sarpá serpent, bhojá generous, khādá devouring.
d. Of the examples here given, those under b accent the radical syllable, and those under c
the ending. And this is in perhaps a majority of cases the fact as regards the two classes of
derivatives; so that, taken in connection with kindred facts as to other suffixes, it hints at such
a difference of accent as a general tendency of the language. A few sporadic

instances are met with of the same form having the one or the other value according to its
accent: thus, éṣa haste, eṣá hasting; çā́sa order, çāsá orderer (other examples are coda, çāka,
çoka: compare a similar difference with other derivatives in as, ana, an, man). But exceptions
are numerous — thus, for example, jayá, javá, smará, action-nouns; çráva, mógha, stáva, agent-
nouns — and the subject calls for a much wider and deeper investigation than it has yet
received, before the accentuation referred to can be set up as a law of the language in
derivation.
2. e. With vṛddhi-strengthening of the root — but only where ā is the resulting radical
vowel: that is, of medial a, and of final ṛ (most often), u or ū, i or ī (rare).
f. Examples of action-nouns are: kā́ma love, bhāgá share, nādá noise, dāvá fire, tārá
crossing. Very few forms of clear derivation and meaning are quotable with accent on the root-
syllable.
g. Examples of agent-nouns are: grābhá seizing, vāhá carrying, nāyá leading, jārá lover.
3. h. With unstrengthened root, the examples are few: e. g. kṛçá lean, turá rapid, yugá
yoke, sruvá spoon, priyá dear, vrá troop, çucá bright.
i. A number of words of this class, especially as occurring in composition, are doubtless
results of the transfer of root-stems to the a-declension: e. g. -ghuṣa, -sphura, -tuda, -dṛça, -vida,
-kira.
j. A few a-stems are made, especially in the older language, from conjugation-stems, mostly
causative: thus, -āmaya, ilaya, -in̄khaya, -ejaya, -dhāraya, -pāraya, -mṛḍaya, -çamaya (compare the
ā-stems, 1149 c,d); also desiderative, as bībhatsa (compare 1038). Occasional examples also
occur from tense-stems: thus, from nu-stems, or secondary stems made from such, hinvá, -inva,
-jinva, -pinva, -sinva, -sunva, -açnuva; from others, -pṛṇa, -mṛṇa, -stṛṇa, -puna, -jāna, -paçya,
-manya, -dasya, -jurya, -kṣudhya, -sya, -tiṣṭha, -jighra, -piba; from future-stems, kariṣya (JB.),
janiṣya, bhaviṣya, ruciṣya (?); apparently from aorist-stems, jeṣá, néṣa-, parṣá, pṛkṣá (?), -hoṣa.
4. k. Derivatives in a from a reduplicated root-form are a considerable class, mostly
occurring in the older language. They are sometimes made with a simple reduplication: thus,
cacará, cikita, dṛdhrá, dadhṛṣá, babhasa, -babhra, vavrá, çiçayá, çiçnátha (an action-noun),
sasrá; but oftener with an intensive reduplication: thus, merely strengthened, cākṣmá, -cācala,
jāgara, nānada, lālasa, vīvadhá (?), -memiṣa, rerihá and leliha, vevijá, nonuva, momughá,
-roruda, lolupa; with consonant added, -can̄kaça-, -can̄krama, jan̄gama, cañcala, -jañjapa,
dandhvana, -nannama, -jarjalpa, jarjara, -tartura, -dardira, múrmura, gadgada; dissyllabic,
-karikra, kanikradá, carācará and calācalá, marīmṛçá, malimlucá, varīvṛtá, sarīsṛpá, paniṣpadá,
saniṣyadá, sanisrasá, patāpata, madāmada, -vadāvada, ghanā-

ghaná. Many of these are to be regarded as from an intensive conjugation-stem; but some of
them show a form not met with in intensive conjugation.
5. l. Derivatives with this suffix from roots as compounded with the verbal prefixes are quite
common, in all the modes of formation (in each, in proportion to the frequency of independent
words): constituting, in fact, considerably the largest body of derivative stems with prefixes.
They are of both classes as to meaning. The accent is, with few exceptions, on the ending —
and that, without any reference to the value of the stem as action-noun or agent-noun.
m. Examples are: saṁgamá assembly, nimeṣá wink, abhidrohá enmity, anukará assistance,
udāná inspiration, pratyāçrāvá response; — paricará wandering, saṁjayá victorious, vibodhá
wakeful, atiyājá over-pious, udārá inciting, elevated, uttudá rousing, saṁgirá swallowing,
ādardirá crushing, adhican̄kramá climbing.
n. The only definite class of exceptions in regard to accent appears to be that of the
adverbial gerunds in am (above, 995), which are accented on the root-syllable. A very few
other stems have the same tone: for example, utpā́ta portent, āçréṣa plague. A few others,
mostly agent-nouns, have the accent on the prefix: for example, vyòṣa (i. e. ví-oṣa) burning,
prátiveça neighbor, ā́bhaga sharing; but also sáṁkāça appearance.
o. For the remaining compounds of these derivatives, with the inseparable prefixes and with
other elements, see the next chapter. It may be merely mentioned here that such compounds
are numerous, and that the a-derivative has often an active participial value, and is frequently
preceded by a case-form, oftenest the accusative.
p. Many words in the language appear to end with a suffix a, while yet they are referable
to no root which can be otherwise demonstrated as such.
1149. आ ā. The vast majority of stems in आ ā are feminine adjectives, corresponding to
masculines and neuters in अ a (332, 334). But also many suffixes ending in अ a have
corresponding feminine forms in long आ ā, making a greater or less number of action-nouns.
These will be given under the different suffixes below.
a. There is further, however, a considerable body of feminine action-nouns made by adding
ā to a root, and having an independent aspect; though they are doubtless in part transfers from
the root-noun (1147). Usually they show an unstrengthened form of root, and (such as occur in
accented texts) an accented suffix.

b. Examples are īçā́ lordship, krīdā́ play, dayā́ pity, nindā́ reproach, çan̄kā́ doubt, hiṅsā
injury, kṣamā patience, kṣudhā hunger, bhāṣā speech, sevā service, spṛhā eagerness.
c. But especially, such nouns in ā are made in large numbers, and with perfect freedom,
from secondary conjugation-stems.
d. Thus, especially from desiderative stems, as jigīṣā́, bhikṣā́, vīrtsā́, bībhatsā́, etc. (see
1038); in the formation of periphrastic perfects, especially from causative stems, but also from
desiderative and intensive, and even from primary present-stems (1071 c–f); from denominative
stems, in the older language, as açvayā́, sukratūyā́, apasyā́, uruṣyā́, asūyā́, açanayā́, jīvanasyā́,
etc., and quite rarely in the later, as mṛgayā.
e. The only example from a reduplicated stem is the late paspaçā; for sūṣā́, ján̄ghā, and
jihvā́, which have a reduplicated aspect, are of doubtful origin. From present-stems come icchā
and probably -ṛcchā.
1150. अन ana. With this suffix (as with अ a) are formed innumerable derivatives, of both the
principal classes of meaning, and with not infrequent specializations. The root has oftenest
guṇa-strengthening, 
but 
not 
seldom vṛddhi instead; and in a few cases it remains
unstrengthened. Derivatives of this formation are frequent from roots with prefixes, and also in
composition with other elements.
a. The normal and greatly prevalent accent is upon the root-syllable, without regard to the
difference of meaning; but cases occur of accented final, and a few of accented penult. The
action-nouns are in general of the neuter gender. The feminine of adjectives is made either in ā
or in ī (for details, see below). And a few feminine action-nouns in anā and anī occur, which
may be ranked as belonging to this suffix.
1. b. With strengthened and accented root-syllable. Under this head fall, as above indicated,
the great mass of forms.
c. With guṇa-strengthening: examples of action-nouns are sádana seat, rákṣaṇa protection,
danā́ giving, cáyana collection, védana property, hávana call, bhójana enjoyment, káraṇa deed,
várdhana increase; — of agent-nouns, tápana burning, cétana visible, códana impelling.
d. With vṛddhi-strengthening (only in such circumstances that ā remains as vowel of the
radical syllable): examples are -cā́tana, nā́çana, mā́dana, -vā́cana, -vā́sana, -vā́hana, sā́dana,
-spā́çana, svā́dana, -ā́yana, -yā́vana, -srāvaṇa, -pā́raṇa.
e. From roots with prefixes, the derivatives of this formation are very numerous, being
exceeded in frequency only by those made with the

suffix a (above, 1148 l, m). A few examples are: ākrámaṇa striding on, udyā́na upgoing,
nidhā́na receptacle, prā́ṇana expiration, vimócana release and releasing, saṁgámana assembly
a n d assembler, adhivikártana cutting off, avaprabhráṅçana falling away down. For other
compounds of these derivatives, showing the same accent (and the same feminine stem), see
the next chapter (below, 1271). A few exceptions occur: vicakṣaṇá, upariçayaná, and the
feminines pramandanī́ and nirdahanī́.
f. The adjectives of this formation, simple or compound, make their feminine usually in ī:
thus, códanī, pécanī, spáraṇī, jámbhanī; prajñā́nī, prókṣaṇī, saṁgráhaṇī, abhiṣávaṇī, vidháraṇī
(cetanī́ is of doubtful meaning: below, i). An adjective compound, however, having a noun in ana
as final member, makes its feminine in ā: thus, sūpasarpaṇā́ of easy approach, ṣáḍvidhānā of
sextuple order, anapavācanā́ not to be ordered away .
2. The more irregular formations may be classed as follows:
g. With accent on the final: a number of agent-nouns and adjectives, as karaṇá active
(against káraṇa act), kṛpaṇá miserable (against kṛpáṇa misery), tvaraṇá hasting, rocaná shining,
kroçaná yelling, svapaná sleepy, kṣayaṇá habitable.
h. These, unlike the preceding class, make their feminine in ā: e. g. tvaraṇā́, spandanā́. A
few feminine action-nouns in the older language have the same form: thus, açanā́, asanā́,
mananā́, dyotanā́, rodhanā́, çvetanā́, hasanā́ (and compare kapanā́, raçanā́); those of the later
language in anā (rather numerous) are doubtful as regards accent.
i. Beside these may be mentioned a few feminines in anī́, of more or less doubtful character:
arṣaṇī́, cetanī́ (to cétana), tapanī́ (to tápana), pṛçanī́, vṛjanī́ (with vṛjána), rajanī, tedanī́.
j. With accent on the penult: a small number of adjectives: as turáṇa hasting, dohána
milking, manána considerate, bhandánā 
and mandána rejoicing, sakṣáṇa overcoming, and
perhaps vakṣáṇa carrying (the last two with aoristic s); and a still smaller number of neuter
action-nouns: daṅsána great deed, vṛjána enclosure, town, veṣáṇa service, kṛpáṇa misery
(against kṛpaṇá miserable), with the masculine kiráṇa dust.
k. The only noticed example of a feminine is in ā: turáṇā. And a few feminine nouns have
the same form: arháṇā, jaráṇā, barháṇā, bhandánā, maṅhánā, mehánā, vadhánā, vanánā,
vakṣáṇā. (And compare the anomalous masc. name uçánā: 355 a.)
l. Without strengthening of the root are made a small number of derivatives: thus (besides
those already noted, kṛpáṇa and kṛpaṇá, vṛjána and vṛjanī́, kiráṇa, turáṇa), further accented
examples are úraṇa, dhúvana, pṛ́çana, bhúvana, vṛ́jana, vṛ́ṣaṇa, -súvana; and later are found
sphuraṇa, sphuṭana, spṛhaṇa, -hnuvana, likhana, rudana, etc. RV. makes denominatives from
riṣaṇa-, ruvaṇa-, vipana-, huvana-.

m. Stems in ana are made also from secondary conjugation-stems: thus, from desideratives,
as cikitsana (see 1038); from causatives, as hāpana, bhīṣaṇa (see 1051 g); from denominatives,
with great freedom, in the later language, as ākarṇana, unmūlana, çlakṣṇana, cihnana; from
intensives and other reduplicated stems, only can̄kramaṇa, jan̄gamana, jāgaraná, yoyupana.
n. A few isolated cases may be further mentioned: from tense-stems, - jighraṇa, -ūrṇavana,
-paçyana, yacchana, -siñcana; from prepositions, antaraṇa and sámana; astamana from the quasi-
prefix (1092 b) astam. Feminines in anā of doubtful connection are yóṣaṇā woman (beside
yóṣan, yoṣā, etc.) and pṛ́tanā.
1151. अस् as. By this suffix are made (usually with guṇa-strengthening of the root- vowel)
especially a large class of neuter nouns, mostly abstract (action-nouns), but sometimes assuming
a concrete value; and also, in the older language, a few agent-nouns and adjectives, and a
considerable number of infinitives.
a. The accent in words of the first class is on the root, and in the second on the ending;
and in a few instances words of the two classes having the same form are distinguished by
their accent; the infinitives have for the most part the accent on the suffix.
1. b. Examples of the first and principal class are: ávas aid, favor, tápas warmth, práyas
pleasure, téjas splendor, çrávas fame, dóhas milking, káras deed, práthas breadth, cétas and
mánas mind, cákṣas eye, sáras pond, vácas speech.
c. A few words of this class are of irregular formation: thus, without strengthening of the
root, júvas quickness (beside jávas), úras breast, mṛ́dhas contempt; and iras- (irasy-) and vipas-,
and the adverbs tirás, mithás, huras-, also çíras head, are to be compared; — with vṛddhi-
strengthening, -vā́cas, vā́sas, vā́has, -svādas, and, of doubtful connections, pā́jas, pā́thas, and
-hāyas; — perhaps with an aoristic s, héṣas missile; — pī́vas contains a v apparently not radical.
d. After final ā of a root is usually inserted y before the suffix (258): thus, dhā́yas, -gā́yas.
But there are in the oldest language apparent remains of a formation in which as was added
directly to radical ā: thus, bhā́s and -dās (often to be pronounced as two syllables), jñā́s, mā́s;
and -dhas and -das, from the roots dhā and dā.
2. e. The instances in which an agent-noun is differentiated by its accent from an action-
noun are: ápas work, and apás active; yáças beauty, and yaçás beauteous; táras quickness, and
tarás (VS., once) quick; távas strength, and tavás strong; dúvas worship, and duvás lively (?);
máhas greatness, and mahás great; between rákṣas n. and

rakṣás m., both meaning demon, and between tyájas n. abandonment (?) and tyajás m.
descendant (?), the antithesis is much less clear.
f. Adjectives in ás without corresponding abstracts are: toçás bestowing, yajás offering,
vedhás pious, probably āhanás heady; and a few other words of isolated occurence, as veçás,
dhvarás. From a denominative stem is made mṛgayás wild animal (RV., once).
g. But there are also a very few cases of abstract nouns, not neuter, accented on the
ending: thus, jarás old age, bhiyás fear; and doubtless also havás call, and tveṣás impulse. The
feminine uṣás dawn, and doṣás night, might belong either here or under the last preceding
head.
h. Apparently containing a suffix as are the noun upás lap, and certain proper names:
án̄giras, nodhás, bhalānás, arcanānás, naciketas. The feminine apsarás nymph is of doubtful
derivation.
i. The irregular formation of some of the words of this division will be noticed, without
special remark.
3. j. The infinitives made by the suffix as have been explained above (973): they show
various treatment of the root, and various accent (which last may perhaps mark a difference of
gender, like that between sáhas and jarás).
4. k. The formation of derivatives in as from roots compounded with prefixes is very
restricted — if, indeed, it is to be admitted at all. No infinitive in as occurs with a prefix; nor
any action-noun; and the adjective combinations are in some instances evidently, and in most
others apparently, possessive compounds of the noun with the prefix used adjectively: the most
probable exceptions are -nyókas and víṣpardhas. As in these examples, the accent is always on
the prefix.
l. Certain Vedic stems in ar may be noticed here, as more or less exchanging with stems in
as, and apparently related with such. They were reported above, at 169 a.
In connection with this, the most common and important suffix ending in s, may be best
treated the others, kindred in office and possibly also in origin, which end in the same sibilant.
1152. तस् tas, नस् nas, सस् sas. With these suffixes are made an extremely small number of
action-nouns. Thus:
a. With tas are made rétas seed, and srótas stream.
b. With nas are made ápnas acquisition, árṇas wave, -bhárṇas offering, rékṇas riches; and
in dráviṇas wealth, and párīṇas fulness is apparently to be seen the same suffix, with prefixed
elements having the present value of union-vowels. Probably the same is true of dámūnas
house-friend, and ṛ́jūnas (RV.) n. pr., uçánas (or -nā) n. pr.
c. With sas is perhaps made vápsas beauty; and tárūṣas may be mentioned with it (rather
tarus-a?).

1153. इस् is. With the suffix is is formed a small number (about a dozen) of nouns.
a. They are in part nouns of action, but most are used concretely. The radical syllable has
the guṇa-strengthening, and the accent is on the suffix (except in jyótis light, vyáthis, and ā́mis,
raw meat). Examples are: arcís, rocís, and çocís light, chadís or chardís cover, barhís straw,
vartís track, sarpís butter, havís oblation, dyotis light, and kravís raw flesh. Avis- , pā́this,
bhrājis-, and máhis- are isolated variants of stems in as; and túvis-, çucis-, and surabhis- appear
inorganically for tuvi etc. in a few compounds or derivatives.
1154. उस् us. With this suffix are made a few words, of various meaning, root-form, and
accent.
a. They are words signifying both action and agent. A few have both meanings, without
difference of accent: thus, tápus heat and hot; árus wound and sore; cákṣus brightness and
seeing, eye; vápus wonderful and wonder. The nouns are mostly neuter, and accented on the
root-syllable: thus, ā́yus, tárus, púrus, múhus (? only adverbial), míthus (do.), yájus, çā́sus;
exceptions are: in regard to accent, janús birth; in regard to gender, mánus man, and náhus,
proper name. Of adjectives, are accented on the ending jayús, vanús, and dakṣús burning
(which appears to attach itself to the aorist-stem).
1155. इ i. With this suffix are formed a large body of derivatives, of all genders: adjectives
and masculine agent-nouns, feminine abstracts, and a few neuters. They show a various form of
the root: strong, weak, and reduplicated. Their accent is also various. Many of them have
meanings much specialized; and many (including most of the neuters) are hardly to be
connected with any root elsewhere demonstrable.
1. a. The feminine action-nouns are of very various form: thus, with weak root-form, rúci
brightness, tvíṣi sheen; kṛṣí ploughing, nṛtí dance; — with guṇa-strengthening (where possible),
rópi pain, çocí heat, vaní and saní gain; — with vṛddhi-strengthening, grā́hi seizure, dhrā́ji
course, ājí race; from √duṣ comes dū́ṣi (compare dūṣayati, 1042 b). The variety of accent, which
seems reducible to no rule, is illustrated by the examples given. The few infinitively used words
of this formation (above, 975 b) have a weak root-form, with accent on the ending.
2. b. The adjectives and masculine agent-nouns exhibit tho same variety. Thus:
c. With unstrengthened root: çúci bright, bhṛ́mi lively (√bhram), gṛ́bhi container.

d. With unstrengthened root (or root incapable of guṇa-change): arí enemy, máhi great, arcí
beam, granthí knot, krīḍí playing; with vṛddhi-increment, kā́rṣi, jā́ni, -dhāri, çā́ri, sācí, sādi,
-sāhi, and a few words of obscure connections: thus, drāpí mantle, rāçí heap, pāṇí hand, etc.
The isolated -ānaçi appears to come from the perfect-stem (788) of √aç.
e. With reduplicated root. This is in the older language a considerable class, of quite various
form. Thus: with weak or abbreviated root, cákri, jághri (√ghar) , pápri, sásri, -amri, babhrí,
vavrí, jágmi, -jájñi (√jan), -tatni, jághni, sásni, súṣvi, -çiçvi; and, with displacement of final ā (or
its weakening to the semblance of the suffix), dadí, papí, yayí (with a case or two from yayī́),
-jajñi, dádhi; — from the ur-form of roots in changeable ṛ, jáguri, táturi, pápuri (púpuri SV.); —
with simple reduplication, cíkiti, yúyudhi, vívici; — with strengthened reduplication, -cācali,
tā́tṛpi, dā́dhṛṣi, vā́vahi, sāsahí, tū́tuji and tūtují, yū́yuvi, yū́yudhi; and jarbhári and bámbhāri.
And karkarí lute and dundubhí drum have the aspect of belonging to the same class, but are
probably onomatopoetic. The accent, it will be noticed, is most often on the reduplication, but
not seldom elsewhere (only once on the root). It was noticed above (271 f) that these
reduplicated derivatives in i not seldom take an object in the accusative, like a present
participle.
f. Formations in i from the root compounded with prefixes are not at all numerous. They are
accented usually on the suffix. Examples arc: āyají, vyānaçí, nijaghní, parādadí, viṣāsahí; but
also ājā́ni, āmúri, vívavri. As compounded with other preceding words, the adjectives or agent-
nouns in i are not rare, and are regularly accented on the root: see the next chapter, 1276.
g. From √dhā comes a derivative -dhi, forming many masculine compounds, with the value
both of an abstract and a concrete: thus, with prefixes, antardhí, uddhí, nidhí, paridhí, etc.
From √dā is made in like manner ādi beginning, and from √sthā, pratiṣṭhí resistance. Opinions
are at variance as to whether such forms are to be regarded as made with the suffix i,
displacing the radical ā, or with weakening of ā to i.
3. h. Neuter nouns in i are few, and of obscure derivation: examples are ákṣi eye, ásthi
bone, dádhi curds, etc.
1156. ई ī. Stems in ई ī (like those in आ ā, above, 1149) are for the most part feminine
adjectives, corresponding to masculines and neuters of other terminations.
a. Thus, feminines in ī are made from a-stems (332, 334: and see also the different suffixes),
from i-stems (344, 346), from u-stems (344 b), from ṛ-stems (376 a), and from various
consonant-stems (378 a).
b. But there are also a few stems in ī wearing the aspect of independent derivatives.
Examples are dakṣī, dehī́, nadī́, nāndī́, péṣī,

vakṣī́ (apparently with aoristic a), veçī́, çā́kī, çácī, çámī, çímī, tarī, vāpī; they are either action-
nouns or agent-nouns. In the later language (as noticed at 344 a) there is very frequent
interchange of i- and ī-stems and the forms from them.
c. In the oldest language there are even a few masculines in ī. They were noticed, and their
inflection illustrated, above, at 355 b, 356.
1157. ित ti. This suffix forms a large class of frequently used feminine nouns of action; and
also a few agent-nouns (masculine) and adjectives. The root has in general the same form as
before the suffix त ta of the passive participle (952 ff.) — that is to say, a weak, and often a
weakened or abbreviated, form.
a. The accent ought, it would appear, in analogy with that of the participle, to rest always
upon the suffix; but in the recorded condition of the language it does so only in a minority of
cases: namely, about fifty, against sixty cases of accent an the radical syllable, and a hundred
and forty of undetermined accent; a number of words — iti, ṛti, citti, tṛpti, pakti, puṣṭi, bhūti,
bhṛti, vṛṣṭi, çakti, çruṣṭi, sṛṣṭi, sthiti — have both accentuations.
1. b. Examples of the normal formation are: rātí gift, ūtí aid, rītí flow, stutí praise, bhaktí
division, viṣṭí service, stutí praise, kīrtí fame, pūrtí bestowal, matí thought, pītí drink (√pā; pple
pīta), dhāutí stream (√dhāv; pple dhāuta); — and with accented root, gáti motion, çā́ṁti repose,
díti division (√dā; pple ditá), dṛ́ṣṭi sight, íṣṭi offering (√yaj: pple iṣṭá) , úkti speech (√vac: pple
uktá), vṛ́ddhi increase.
c. The roots which form their participle in ita (956) do not have the i also before ti: thus,
only gúpti, -dṛpti. A few roots having their participle in na instead of ta (957) form the abstract
noun also in ni (below, 1158). And from the roots tan and ran occur tantí and ránti, beside the
more regular tati and ráti; also áhanti (once; VS.) beside áhati. From roots having the form dā,
the derivative in composition is sometimes -tti (for dāti, with loss of radical vowel: compare the
participle-form -tta, above, 955 f): thus, niravatti (K.), samprátti (ÇB.), páritti (TB.), vásutti,
bhágatti, maghátti (all RV.).
d. A few derivatives are made from reduplicated roots; their accent is various: thus, carkṛtí,
dī́dhiti and -dī́diti, jígarti, and perhaps the proper name yayā́ti; also jágdhi from √jakṣ (233 f).
e. Derivatives from roots with prefixes are numerous, and have (as in the case of the
participles in ta, and the action-nouns in tu) the accent on the prefix: examples are ánumati,
abhī̀ti, ā́huti, nírṛti, vyā̀pti, sáṁgati. The only exceptions noticed are āsaktí and āsutí, and abhi-

ṣṭí (beside abhíṣṭi). In other combinations than with prefixes, the accentuation is in general the
same: see the next chapter (1274).
2. f. The adjectives and agent-nouns — which, as masculines, are to be connected with
these rather than with the feminine abstracts — are very few: thus, pū́ti putrid, váṣṭi eager,
dhū́ti shaker, jñātí relative, pattí footman, páti master; and a few others, of more or less
dubious character. The accent is various, as in the other class.
3. g. A few words show the suffix ti preceded by various vowels, union- or stem-vowels. The
ordinary intermediate i of the ta-participle etc. is seen in sániti, ujhiti, -gṛhīti (ī, as usual with
this root: 900 b), paṭhiti, bhaṇiti; and with them may be mentioned the adjective ṛ́jīti, the
proper names turvī́ti and dabhī́ti, and snī́hitī and snéhitī, notwithstanding their long final. With
ati are made a few derivatives, variously accented: thus, the action-nouns aṅhatí, dṛçatí,
pakṣatí, mithatí, vasatí, ramáti, vratáti, amáti and ámati, -dhrajati; and the agent-words aratí,
khalatí, vṛkáti, rámati, dahati. In some of these is to be seen with probability a stem-vowel, as
also in jánayati and rasayati (and RV. has gopayátya). The grammarians' method of representing
a root by its 3d sing. pres. indic., declining this as a ti-stem, begins in the older language: e. g.
étivant (TB.), kṣetivant (AB.), yajati and juhoti and dadāti (S.), nandati (MBh.). The feminine
yúvati young, maiden is of isolated character.
h. In some of the words instanced in the last paragraph, ti is perhaps applied as a
secondary suffix. A kindred character belongs to it in the numeral derivatives from pronominal
roots, káti, táti, yáti, and from numerals, as daçati, viṅçatí, ṣaṣṭí, etc., with pan̄ktí (from páñca);
in padāti; and in addhātí, from the particle addhā́.
1158. िन ni. This suffix agrees in general in its uses and in the form of its derivatives with
the preceding; but it makes a very much smaller number of words, among which the feminine
abstracts are a minority.
a. As was noticed above (1157 c), a few verbs (ending in vowels) making their passive
participle in na instead of ta make their action-noun in ni instead of ti. From the older
language are quotable jyāní injury, jūrní heat, hāni abandonment (and the masculines ghṛ́ṇi and
jī́rṇi); later occur glāni, -mlāni, sanni-.
b. Words of the other class are: açni eating, -uṣṇi burning, váhni carrying, jū́rṇi singing,
tū́rṇi hasty, bhū́rṇi excited, dharṇí sustaining, preṇí loving, vṛṣṇí and vṛ́ṣṇi virile; and with them
may be mentioned pṛ́çni speckled.
c. In preṇí, yóni, mení, çréṇi, çróṇi is seen a strengthening of the radical syllable, such as
does not appear among the derivatives in ti.
d. Derivatives in ni from roots with prefixes do not appear to occur.

e. In hrādúni and hlāduni we have a prefixed u. In the words ending in ani, the a has
probably the same value with that of ati (above, 1157 g); but ani has gained a more
independent status, and may be best treated as a separate suffix.
1159. अिन ani. The words made by this suffix have the same double value with those made
by the preceding suffixes. Their accent is various. Thus:
a. Feminine action-nouns, sometimes with concreted meaning: as, iṣáṇi impulse, çaráṇi
injury, dyotaní brightness, kṣipaṇí blow, açáni missile, vartaní track; and -arçani, udani-, jaraṇi-.
b. Adjectives and other agent-words are: aráṇi fire-stick, caráṇi movable, cakṣáṇi
enlightener, taráṇi quick, dhamáni pipe, dhvasáni scattering, vakṣáṇi strengthener, saraṇi track.
Dharaṇi and one or two other late words are probably variants to stems in anī. From a
reduplicated root-form comes -paptani. From desiderative stems are made rurukṣáṇi, siṣāsáni,
and (with prefix) ā-çuçukṣáṇi. And a small number of words appear to attach themselves to an
s-aorist stem: thus, parṣáṇi, sakṣáṇi, carṣaṇí.
c. It is questionable whether the infinitives in ṣaṇí (978) are to be put here, as accusatives
of a formation in ani, or under the next suffix, as locatives of a formation in an, from roots and
stems increased by an aoristic s.
1160. अन् an. Not many words are made with a suffix of this form, and of these few are
plainly to be connected with roots. Certain rare neuters (along with the doubtful infinitives) are
nouns of action; the rest are masculine and neuter agent-nouns. The accent is various.
a. The infinitives which admit of being referred to this suffix, as locative cases, are those in
ṣáṇi, of which the sibilant may be the final of a tense-stem. They are all given above (978).
b. The other action-nouns in an are mahán greatness, rāján authority (RV., once: compare
rā́jan; the accent-relation is the reverse of the usual one), and gámbhan depth (VS., once); and
PB. has kṣepṇā once.
c. Agent-nouns (in part of doubtful connection) are: ukṣán ox, cákṣan eye, tákṣan carpenter,
dhvasán proper name, pūṣán name of a god, majján marrow, rā́jan king, vṛ́ṣan virile, bull,
sághan, snīhán (snūhan Āpast.); also -gman, jmán, -bhvan, -çvan, with çván, yúvan, yóṣan, and
the stems áhan, ū́dhan, etc. (430–4), filling up the inflection of other defective stems.
d. With prefixes occur pratidī́van and átidīvan, vibhván, níkāman.

1161. तु tu. The great mass of the words of this formation are the infinitives — accusatives
in the later language, in the earlier likewise datives and ablative-genitives: see above, 970 b,
972, But a few are also used independently, as action-nouns or with concreted meaning; and an
extremely small number, of somewhat questionable character, appear to have the value of
agent-words. They are of all genders, but chiefly masculine. The root has the guṇa-
strengthening.
a. The infinitive words are accented on the radical syllable when simple, and most of the
others have the same accent; but a few have the tone on the ending.
b. Examples are: of the regular formation, masc. dā́tu share, jātu- birth, dhā́tu element,
tántu thread, mántu counsel, ótu weft, sātu receptacle, sétu tie, sótu pressure, also krátu
capacity, and sáktugrits; fem. vástu morning; neut, vastu thing, vā́stu abode; — with accent on
the ending, aktú ray, jantúbeing, gātú way and song, yātú (?) demon, hetú cause, ketú banner
(all masc.); — with unstrengthened root, ṛtú season, pitú drink, sū́tu birth, and apparently kṛ́tu
(in kṛ́tvas times): with vṛddhi-strerigthening, vā́stu (above). Agent-nouns appear to be dhā́tu
drinkable and kroṣṭu jackal.
c. The infinitives in tu have (968) often the union-vowel i before the suffix, and this in a few
cases is lengthened to ī. In other use occur also - stárītu and -dhárītu (both with dus), -hávītu
(with su); turphárītu seems of the same formation, but is obscure.
d. In a few instances, the suffix tu appears to be added to a tense- or conjugation-stem in a;
thus, edhatú and vahatú; tamyatú and tapyatú; and siṣāsátu. The accent of the last is paralleled
only by that of jīvā́tu life, which is further exceptional in showing a long ā; it is used sometimes
in the manner of an infinitive.
1162. नु nu. This suffix forms a comparatively small body of words, generally masculine, and
having both the abstract and the concrete value.
a. The accent is usually on the ending, and the root unstrengthened.
b. Thus: kṣepnú jerk, bhānú light (later sun), vagnú sound, sūnú son, dā́nu (with irregular
accent) m. f. demon, n. drop, dew; — dhenú f. cow; — gṛdhnú hasty, tapnú burning, trasnu
fearful, dhṛṣṇú bold; — and víṣṇu Vishnu, and perhaps sthāṇú pillar. Compare also suffix tnu,
1196 a.

c. This also (like tu) appears sometimes with a prefixed a: thus, kṣipaṇú missile, krandanú
and nadanú roaring, nabhanú (and -nū́, f.) fountain, vibhañjanú (only instance with prefix)
breaking to pieces; and perhaps the proper names dāsanu and kṛçā́nu belong here.
1163. थ tha. The words made with this suffix are almost without exception action-nouns
(though some have assumed a concrete value). They are of all genders. The root is of a weak
(or even weakened) form, and the accent usually on the suffix.
a. Thus: masc., -itha going, ártha goal, -kṛtha making, gāthá song, pakthá n. pr., bhṛthá
offering, -yātha road, -çītha lying down, çotha swelling, sīktha sediment; and, of less clear
connections, yūthá herd, rátha chariot; — neut., ukthá saying, tīrthá ford, nīthá song, rikthá
heritage, and apparently pṛṣṭhá back; — fem. (with ā) , gā́thā song, nī́thā way. Radical ā is
weakened to ī in gī́tha song and -pītha drink and -pītha protection; a final nasal is lost in
-gatha going and hathá slaying. In vijigīthá (ÇB.; but BAU. -īta) is apparently seen a formation
from a reduplication of √jī, victorious.
b. A few examples of combination with prefixes occur, with accent on the final: thus, nirṛthá
destruction, saṁgathá union, etc.
c. Still more common in the older language is a form of this suffix to which has become
prefixed an á, which is probably of thematic origin, though become a union-vowel. Thus:
-anátha breathing, ayátha foot, carátha mobility, tveṣátha vehemence, and so prothátha, yajátha,
ravátha, vakṣátha, ucátha, vidátha, çaṅsatha, çapátha, çayátha, çvayátha, çvasátha, sacátha,
stanátha, stavátha, sravátha, and, with weak root-form, ruvátha; the later language adds
karatha, taratha, çamatha, savatha. With a prefix, the accent is thrown forward upon the final:
thus, āvasathá abode, pravasathá absence; but prāṇátha breath is treated as if prān were an
integral root.
d. Isolated combinations of tha with other preceding vowels occur: thus, várūtha protection,
járūtha wasting (?); and matútha (√man?).
1164. थु thu. This suffix (like थ tha, above) has an अ á attached to it, and, in the very few
derivatives which it makes, appears only as अथु áthu.
a. The only Vedic examples are ejáthu quaking, vepáthu trembling, stanáthu roaring. Later
cases are nandáthu (TS.), nadathu (U.), kṣavathu (S.), davathu, bhraṅçathu, majjathu, vamathu,
çvayathu, sphūrjathu.
1165. यु yu. With this suffix are made a very few nouns,

both of agent and of action, with unstrengthened root and various accent. Thus:
a. Abstracts (masc.) are manyú wrath, mṛtyú death (with t added to the short final of the
root).
b. Adjectives etc. are druhyú n. pr., bhujyú pliable, mucyu (GB. i. 1.7), çundhyú pure; yájyu
pious, sáhyu strong, dásyu enemy; and, with vṛddhi-strengthening, jāyú victorious.
c. For other derivatives ending in yu, see the suffix u, below, 1178 h, i.
1166. म ma. The action-nouns made by this suffix are almost all masculine; and they are of
various root-form and accent, as are also the agent-nouns and adjectives.
a. Examples of action-nouns are: ajmá course, gharmá heat; éma progress, bhā́ma
brightness, sárna flow, stóma song of praise.
b. Examples of agent-nouns etc. are: tigmá sharp, bhīmá terrible, çagmá mighty, idhmá fuel,
yudhmá warrior. A single instance from a reduplicated root is tūtumá powerful. Sarámā f., with
a before the suffix, is of doubtful connection.
c. A number of stems in ma have stems in man beside them, and appear, at least in part,
to be transfers from the an- to the a-declension. Such are ajma, oma, ema, arma, tókma,
darmá, dhárma, narmá, yā́ma, yugma, vema, çuṣma, sóma, sárma, hóma.
1167. िम mi. A very small number of nouns, masculine and feminine, formed with mi, may
be conveniently noticed here.
Thus, from ṛ-roots, ūrmí wave, -kūrmi action, sūrmī́ f. tube; from others, jāmí relation,
bhū́mi or bhū́mī f. earth, lakṣmī́ sign; also probably raçmí line, ray; and the adjective krúdhmi
(? RV., once).
1168. मन् man. The numerous derivatives made with this suffix are almost only action-nouns.
The great majority of them are neuter, and accented on the root-syllable; a much smaller
number are masculine, and accented on the suffix. The few agent-words are, if nouns,
masculine, and have the latter accent: in several instances, a neuter and a masculine, of the
one and the other value and accent, stand side by side. The root has in general the guṇa-
strengthening.
1. a. Examples of regularly formed neuters are: kárman action, jánman birth, nā́man name,
vártman track, véçman dwelling, hóman sacrifice, -dyótman splendor.

b. Examples of masculine abstracts are: omán favor, ojmán strength, jemán conquest,
svādmán sweetness, hemán impulse.
c. Corresponding neuter action-nouns and masculine agent-nouns are: bráhman worship and
brahmán priest; dā́man gift and dāmán giver; dhárman rule and dharmán orderer; sádman seat
and sadmán sitter. But óman friend stands in the contrary relation to omán m. favor. Very few
other agent-nouns occur; and all, except brahmán, are of rare occurrence.
d. On the other hand, jeman and varṣman and svādman (and variman) have the difference
of gender and accent without a corresponding difference of meaning.
e. The noun áçman stone, though masculine, is accented on the radical syllable; and two or
three other questionable cases of the same kind occur.
f. The derivatives in man used as infinitives (974) have for the most part the accent of
neuters: the only exception is vidmáne.
g. A few words, of either class, have an irregular root-form: thus, údman, ūṣmán or uṣman,
bhū́man earth, bhūmán abundance, syū́man, sīmán, bhujmán, vidmán, çíkman, çuṣman, sidhman;
and kā́rṣman, bhā́rman, çā́kman.
h. Derivatives in man from roots with prefixes are not numerous. They are usually accented
on the prefix, whether action-nouns or adjectives: thus, prábharman forthbringing, práyáman
departure; ánuvartman following after: the exceptions, vijā́man, prativartmán, visarmán, are
perhaps of possessive formation.
2. i. The same suffix, though only with its abstract-making value, has in a number of cases
before it a union-vowel, i or ī; and imán comes to be used as a secondary suffix, forming
abstract nouns (masculine) from a considerable number of adjectives.
j. The neuters in iman and īman are primary formations, belonging almost only to the older
language: thus, jániman, dhariman (M.), váriman (beside varimán, as noticed above); and
dárīman, dhárīman, párīman (and páreman SV., once), bhárīman, várīman, sárīman, stárīman,
sávīman, and hávīman. Those in īman are hardly met with outside the Rig-Veda.
k. The masculines in imán are in the oldest language less frequent than the neuters just
described: they are tániman (?), jarimán, prathimán, mahimán, varimán (beside the equivalent
váriman and várīman) , varṣimán (beside the equivalent várṣman and varṣmán) , harimán, and
drāghimán (VS.) beside drāghmán (V.B.). Some of these, as well as of the derivatives in simple
man, attach themselves in meaning, or in form also, to adjectives, to which they seem the
accompanying abstracts: compare the similar treatment of the primary comparatives and
superlatives (above, 468): such are pāpmán (to pāpá, pā́pīyas etc.); drāghmán etc. (to dīrghá,
drā́ghīyas, etc.); váriman etc. (to urú,

várīyas, etc.); práthiman (to pṛthú, práthiṣṭha) ; harimán (to hári or hárita) ; várṣman etc. (to
várṣīyas etc.); svā́dman etc. (to svādú, svā́dīyas, etc.). Then in the Brāhmaṇa language are found
further examples: thus, dhūmrimán (TS. K.), draḍhimán (MS. K.: to dṛdhá, dráḍhīyas, etc.),
aṇimán (ÇB.; and áṇiman n. bit), sthemán, stháviman (n. big piece), taruṇiman (K.), paruṣiman
(AB.), abaliman (ChU.), lohitiman (KB.); and still later such as laghiman, kṛṣṇiman, pūrṇiman,
madhuriman, çoṇiman, etc., etc.
1169. वन् van. By this suffix are made almost only agent-words, adjectives and nouns, the
latter chiefly masculines. The root is unstrengthened, and to a short final vowel is added a त् t
before the suffix. The accent is almost always on the root, both in the simple words and in
their compounds.
a. The insertion of t is an intimation that the words of this form are originally made by the
addition of an to derivatives in u and tu; yet van has the present value of an integral suffix in
the language, and must be treated as such.
b. Examples of the usual formation are: masc. yájvan offering, drúhvan harming, çákvan
capable, -ríkvan leaving, -jítvan conquering, sútvan pressing, kṛ́tvan active, -gátvan (like -gat,
-gatya) going, sátvan (√san) warrior; 
neut. párvan joint, dhánvan bow. Irregular, with
strengthened root, are árvan courser, -yāvan (? AV.) driving off; and, with accent on the suffix,
dṛván (? VS.) and vidván (? AV.).
c. Examples from roots with prefixes (which are not rare) are: atītvan excelling, upahásvan
reviler, sambhṛ́tvan collecting; and perhaps vivásvan shining: abhísatvan is a compound with
governing preposition (1310). For the compounds with other elements, which, except in special
cases, have the same accent, see below, 1277.
d. The stems muṣīván robber and sanítvan (each RV., once) are the only ones with a union-
vowel, and are perhaps better regarded as secondary derivatives — of which a few are made
with this suffix: see below, 1234. From a reduplicated root are made rárāvan and cikitván (and
possibly vivásvan).
e. Action-nouns made with the suffix van are only the infinitival words mentioned at 974 —
unless bhurváṇi (RV., once) is to be added, as locative of bhurván.
f. The feminines corresponding to adjectives in van are not made (apparently) directly from
this suffix, but from vara, and end in varī; see below, 1171 b.
1170. वन vana, विन vani, वनु vanu. The very few words

made with these suffixes may best be noticed here, in connection with वन् van (of which the
others are probably secondary extensions).
a. With vana are made vagvaná talkative, satvaná warrior (beside sátvan, above); and, from
a reduplicated root, çuçukvaná shining.
b. With vani are made from simple roots turváṇi excelling, and bhurváṇi restless, and, from
reduplicated roots, çuçukváni shining, dadhṛṣváṇi daring, tuturváṇi striving after, and jugurváṇi
praising; arhariṣváṇi is obscure.
c. With vanu is made only vagvanú tone, noise.
1171. वर vara. With this suffix are made a few derivatives, of all genders, having for the
most part the value of agent-nouns and adjectives. Much more common are the feminine stems
in वरी varī, which, from the earliest period, serve as corresponding feminines to the masculine
stems in वन् van.
a. A few masculine adjectives in vará occur, formally accordant (except in accent) with the
feminines: thus, itvará going, -advara eating; and so, further, in the older language, īçvará,
-jāvara, phárvara, bhārvará, bhāsvará, vyadhvará (?), -sadvara, sthāvará, and doubtless with
them belongs vidvalá; later, -kasvara, gatvara, ghasvara (also ghasmara), -jitvara, naçvara,
pīvara, madvara, -sṛtvara; from a reduplicated root, yāyāvará (B. and later). Many of these have
feminines in ā.
b. The feminines in varī accord in treatment of the root and in accent with the masculines
in van to which they correspond: thus, yájvarī, -jítvarī, sṛ́tvarī, -çī́varī, -yāvarī, and so on (about
twenty-five such formations in RV.); from a reduplicated root, -çiçvarī.
c. A very small number of neuters occur, with accent on the root: thus, kárvara deed,
gáhvara (later also gabhvara) thicket; and a feminine or two, with accent on the penult: urvárā
field, and urvárī tow (both of doubtful etymology).
We take up now the suffixes by which are made only stems having the value of agent-nouns
and adjectives; beginning with a brief mention of the participial endings, which in general have
been already sufficiently treated.
1172. अ् ant (or अत् at). The office of this suffix, in making present and future participles
active, has been fully explained above, in connection with the various tense-stems and
conjugation-stems (chaps. VIII.–XIV.), in combination

with which alone it is employed (not directly with the root, unless this is also used as tense-
stem).
a. A few words of like origin, but used as independent adjectives, were given at 450. With
the same or a formally identical suffix are made from pronominal roots íyant and kíyant (451,
517 a). And ádvayant not double-tongued (RV., once), appears to contain a similar formation
from the numeral dvi — unless we are to assume a denominative verb-stem as intermediate.
1173. वांस् vāṅs (or वस् vas). For the (perfect active) participles made with this suffix, see
above, 802–6, and 458 ff.
a. A few words of irregular and questionable formation were noticed at 462, above. Also,
apparent transfers to a form us or uṣa. RV. vocalizes the v once, in jujuruā́n.
b. The oldest language (RV.) has a very few words in vas, of doubtful relations: ṛ́bhvas and
çíkvas skilful (beside words in va and van), and perhaps khidvas (√khād). The neuter abstract
várivas breadth, room (belonging to urú broad, in the same manner with várīyas and varimán),
is quite isolated. MBh. makes a nominative pīvān, as if from pīvāṅs instead of pīvan.
1174. मान māna. The participles having this ending are, as has been seen (584 b), present
and future only, and have the middle, or the derived passive, value belonging in general to the
stems to which the suffix is attached.
1175. आन āna. The participles ending in आन āna are of middle and passive value, like those
just noticed, and either present, perfect, or (partly with the form सान sāna: above, 897 b) aorist.
a. A few other words ending in the same manner in the old language may be mentioned
here. The RV. has the adjectives tákavāna, bhṛ́gavāṇa, vásavāna, ūrdhvasāná, apparently made
on the model of participial stems. Also the proper names ápnavāna, pṛ́thavāna, and cyávāna and
cyávatāna. Párçāna abyss is doubtful; rujā́nā (RV., once) is probably a false reading; ā́pnāna is
of doubtful character.
1176. त ta. The use of this suffix in forming participles directly from the root, or from a
conjugational (not a tense) stem, was explained above, 952–6. The participles thus made are in
part intransitive, but in great part passive

in value (like those made by the two preceding suffixes, but in much larger measure, and more
decidedly).
a. A few general adjectives, or nouns with concrete meaning, are adaptations of this
participle. Examples are: tṛṣṭá rough, çītá cold, dṛḍhá (for dṝḍhá: 224 a) firm; dūtá messenger,
sūtá charioteer; ṛtá right, gḥṛtá ghee, jātá kind, dyūtá gambling, nṛttá dance, jīvitá life, caritá
behavior, smita smile. The adjective tigitá (RV.) sharp shows anomalous reversion of palatal to
guttural before the i (216 d). Vāvā́ta dear is a single example from a reduplicated root.
b. Doubtless after the example and model of participles from denominative stems (of which,
however, no instances are quotable from the Veda — unless bhāmita RV.), derivatives in ita are
in the later language made directly from noun and adjective-stems, having the meaning of
endowed with, affected by, made to be , and the like (compare the similar English formation in
ed, as horned, barefooted, bluecoated). Examples are rathita furnished with a chariot, duḥkhita
pained, kusumita flowered, durbalita weakened, niḥsaṁçayita indubitable, etc. etc.
c. A few words ending in ta are accented on the radical syllable, and their relation to the
participial derivatives is very doubtful: such are ásta home, márta mortal, vā́ta wind; and with
them may be mentioned gárta high seat, nákta night, hásta hand. Vratá is commonly viewed as
containing a suffix ta, but it doubtless comes from √vṛt (vrat-á, like tradá, vrajá) and means
originally course.
d. Several adjectives denoting color end in ita, but are hardly connectible with roots of
kindred meaning: thus, palitá gray, ásita black, róhita and lóhita red, hárita green; akin with
them are éta variegated, çyetá white. The feminines of these stems are in part irregular: thus,
énī and çyénī; róhiṇī and lóhinī, and háriṇī (but the corresponding masc. háriṇa also occurs);
and ásiknī, páliknī, and háriknī.
e. A small number of adjectives in the older language ending in ata are not to be separated
from the participial words in ta, although their specific meaning is in part gerundive. They are:
pacatá cooked, darçatá and paçyata seen, to be seen, worth seeing; and so yajatá, haryatá,
bharatá. The y of paçyata and haryatá indicates pretty plainly that the a also is that of a
present tense-stem. Rajatá silvery is of more obscure relation to √raj color; párvata mountain
must be secondary.
1177. न na (and इन ina, उन una). The use of the suffix न na in forming from certain roots
participles equivalent to those in त ta, either alongside the latter or instead of them, was
explained above, at 957.
a. With the same suffix are made a number of general adjectives, and of nouns of various
gender (fem. in nā). The accent is on the suffix

or on the root. A few examples are: uṣṇá hot, çuná fortunate, áçna ravenous, çvítna white;
masc., praçná question, yajñá offering, ghṛṇá heat, várṇa color, svápna sleep; neut., parṇá
wing, rátna jewel (?); fem. tṛ́ṣṇa thirst, yācn̄ā́ supplication. But many of the stems ending in na
are not readily connectible with roots. An antithesis of accent is seen in kárṇa ear and karṇá
eared.
b. The few words ending in ina are of doubtful connection, but may be mentioned here:
thus, aminá violent, vṛjiná crooked, dákṣiṇa right, dráviṇa property, druhiṇa, çreṣiṇa, hariṇá;
and kanī́na may be added.
c. The words ending in una are of various meaning and accent, like those in ana: they are
árjuna, karúṇa, -cetúna, táruṇa, dāruṇá, dharúṇa, narúṇa, píçuna, mithuná, yatúna, vayúna,
varuṇa, çalúna, and the feminine yamúnā; and bhrūṇá may be added.
d. These are all the proper participial endings of the language. The gerundives, later and
earlier, are in the main evident secondary formations, and will be treated under the head of
secondary derivation.
We take up now the other suffixes forming agent-nouns and adjectives, beginning with those
which have more or less a participial value.
1178. उ u. With this suffix are made a considerable body of derivatives, of very various
character — adjectives, and agent-nouns of all genders, with different treatment of the root, and
with different accent. It is especially used with certain conjugational stems, desiderative
(particularly later) and denominative (mainly earlier), making adjectives with the value of
present participles; and in such use it wins in part the aspect of a secondary suffix.
a. The root has oftenest a weak (or weakened) form; but it is sometimes vriddhied; least
often (when capable of guṇa), it has the guṇa-strengthening — all without any apparent
connection with either accent or meaning or gender. After final radical ā is usually added y
(258) before the suffix. A few derivatives are made from the reduplicated root. But many words
ending in u are not readily, or not at all, connectible with roots; examples will be given
especially of those that have an obvious etymology.
b. Examples of ordinary adjectives are: urú wide, ṛjú straight, pṛthú broad, mṛdú soft, sādhú
good, svādú sweet, tápu hot, vásu good; jāyú conquering, dārú bursting; çayú lying, réku
empty; dhāyú thirsty, pāyú protecting. Final ā appears to be lost before the suffix in - sthu
(suṣṭhú, anuṣṭhú), and perhaps in yú, -gu (agregú), and -khu (ākhú).
c. Examples of nouns are: masc., aṅçú ray, ripú deceiver, vāyú

wind-god, ásu life, mánu man, Manu; fem., íṣu (also masc.) arrow, síndhu (also masc.) river,
tanū́ or tanú body; neut., kṣú food.
d. Derivatives from reduplicated roots are: cikitú, jágmu, jigyú, jijñu, siṣṇu, -tatnu (unless
this is made with nu or tnu), didyu (?), dadru, yáyu or yayú and yíyu (with final ā lost), pípru
(proper name), -dīdhayu; and títaü, babhrú, -raru (aráru), malimlú (?) have the aspect of being
similar formations.
e. A few derivatives are made from roots with prefixes, with various accentuation: for
example, upāyú on-coming, pramayú going to destruction, viklíndu a certain disease, abhī́çu
rein (director), sáṁvasu dwelling together.
f. From tense-stems, apparently, are made tanyú thundering, bhindú splitting, -vindu finding,
and (with aoristic s) dákṣu and dhákṣu (all RV.).
g. Participial adjectives in ú from desiderative "roots" (stems with loss of their final a) are
sufficiently numerous in the ancient language (RV. has more than a dozen of them, AV. not
quite so many) to show that the formation was already a regular one, extensible at will; and
later such adjectives may be made from every desiderative. Examples (older) are: ditsú, dipsú,
cikitsú, titikṣú, pipīṣu, mumukṣú, iyakṣú, çiçlikṣú; with prefix, abhidipsú; with anomalous accent,
didṛ́kṣu. These adjectives, both earlier and later, may take an object in the accusative (271 a).
h. A few similar adjectives are made in the older language from causatives: thus, dhārayú
(persistent), bhājayú, bhāvayú, maṅhayú, mandayú, çramayú; and mṛgayú from the caus.-denom.
mṛgáya.
i. Much more numerous, however, are such formations from the more proper denominatives,
especially in the oldest language (RV. has toward eighty of them; AV. only a quarter as many,
including six or eight which are not found in RV.; and they are still rarer in the Brāhmaṇas,
and hardly met with later). In a majority of cases, personal verbal forms from the same
denominative stem are in use: thus, for example, to aghāyú, arātīyú, ṛjūyú, caraṇyú, manasyú,
saniṣyú, uruṣyú, saparyú; in others, only the present participle in yánt, or the abstract noun in
yā́ (1149 d), or nothing at all. A few are made upon denominative stems from pronouns: thus,
tvāyú (beside tvāyánt and tvāyā́), yuvayú or yuvāyú, asmayú, svayú, and the more anomalous
ahaṁyú and kiṁyú. Especially where no other denominative forms accompany the adjective, this
has often the aspect of being made directly from the noun with the suffix yu, either with a
meaning of seeking or desiring, or with a more general adjective sense: thus, yavayú seeking
grain, varāhayú boar-hunting, stanasyú desiring the breast; ūrṇāyú woolen, yuvanyú youthful,
bhīmayú terrible. And so the "secondary suffix yu" wins a degree of standing and application as
one forming derivative adjectives (as in ahaṁyú and kiṁyú, above, and doubtless some others,
even of the RV. words). In three RV. cases, the final as of a noun-stem is even changed to o
before it: namely, aṅhoyú, duvoyú (and duvoyā́; beside duvasyú), áskṛdhoyu.

j. The words in yu do not show in the Veda resolution into iu (except dhāsiús AV., once).
1179. ऊ ū. Stems in ऊ ū are very few, even as compared with those in ई ī (1156). They are
for the most part feminines corresponding to masculines in u (344 b), with half-a-dozen more
independent feminines (see 355 c).
a. To those already mentioned above are to be added karṣū́ pit, -calū (in puṁçcalū́), -janū
(in prajanū́), çumbhū́.
1180. उक uka. With this suffix are made derivatives having the meaning and construction
(271 g) of a present participle. The root is strengthened, and has the accent.
a. The derivatives in uka are hardly known in the Veda; but they become frequent in the
Brāhmaṇas, of whose language they are a marked characteristic (about sixty different stems
occur there); and they are found occasionally in the older language. In all probability, they are
originally and properly obtained by adding the secondary suffix ka (1222) to a derivative in u;
but they have gained fully the character of primary formations, and in only an instance or two
is there found in actual use an u-word from which they should be made.
b. The root is only so far strengthened that the radical syllable is a heavy (79) one; and it
has the accent, whether the derivative is made from a simple root or from one with prefix.
c. Examples, from the Brāhmaṇa language, are: vā́duka, nā́çuka, upakrā́muka, prapā́duka,
upasthāyuka 
(258), vyāyuka, véduka, bhā́vuka, kṣódhuka, hā́ruka, várṣuka, samárdhuka,
dáṅçuka, ālambuka, çikṣuka (GB.: RV. has çikṣú), pramā́yuka (ṢB. has pramāyu).
d. Exceptions as regards root-form are: nirmā́rguka (with vṛddhi-strengthening, as is usual
with this root: 627), -kasuka, ṛdhnuka (from a tense-stem; beside árdhuka). AV. accents
sáṁkasuka (ÇB. has saṁkásuka) and víkasuka; RV. has sānuká (which is its only example of the
formation, if it be one; AV. has also ghā́tuka from √han, and ápramāyuka); vasuká (TS. et al.) is
probably of another character. Açanāyuka (PB. et al.) is the only example noticed from a
conjugation-stem.
e. Of later occurrence are a few words whose relation to the others is more or less
doubtful: kārmuka and dhārmuka, tsāruka, tarkuka, nānduka, pādukā, pecuka, bhikṣuka, lāṣuka,
seduka, hiṇḍuka, hreṣuka. Of these, only lāṣuka appears like a true continuer of the formation;
several are pretty clearly secondary derivatives.
f. A formation in ūka (a suffix of like origin, perhaps, with uka) may be mentioned here:
namely, indhūka, majjūka, and, from reduplicated-

reduplicated roots, jāgarū́ka wakeful, jañjapūka (later) muttering, dandaçū́ka biting, yāyajū́ka
sacrificing much, vāvadūka (later) talkative; salalū́ka is questionable.
1181. अक aka. Here, as in the preceding case, we doubtless have a suffix made by
secondary addition of क ka to a derivative in अ a; but it has, for the same reason as the other,
a right to be mentioned here. Its free use in the manner of a primary suffix is of still later date
than that of uka; it has very few examples in the older language.
a. In RV. is found (besides pāvaká, which has a different accent, and which, as the metre
shows, is really pavāka) 
only sā́yaka missile; 
AV. 
adds pī́yaka 
and vádhaka, and VS.
abhikróçaka. But in the later language, such derivatives are common, more usually with raising
of the root-syllable by strengthening to heavy quantity: thus, nāyaka, dāyaka (258), pācaka,
grāhaka, bodhaka, jāgaraka; but also janaka, khanaka. They are declared by the grammarians
to have the accent on the radical syllable. They often occur in copulative composition with
gerundives of the same root: thus, bhakṣyabhakṣaka eatable and eater, vācyavācaka designated
and designation, and so on.
b. That the derivatives in aka sometimes take an accusative object was pointed out above
(271 c).
c. The corresponding feminine is made sometimes in akā or in akī, but more usually in ikā:
thus, nāyikā (with nāyakā), pācikā, bodhikā; compare secondary aka, below, 1222.
d. Derivatives in āka are made from a few roots: thus, jalpāka, bhikṣāka; but very few occur
in the older language: thus, pavāka (above, a), nabhāka, smayā́ka, jáhāka (?), -calāka, patākā.
With āku is made in RV. mṛḍayā́ku, from the causative stem: pṛ́dāku and the proper name
íkṣvāku are of obscure connection.
e. Derivatives in ika and īka will be treated below, in connection with those in ka (1186 c).
1182. तृ tṛ (or त tar). The derivatives made by this suffix, as regards both their mode of
formation and their uses, have been the subject of remark more than once above (see 369 ff.,
942 ff.). Agent-nouns are freely formed with it at every period of the language; these in the
oldest language are very frequently used participially, governing an object in the accusative
(271 d); later they enter into combination with an auxiliary verb, and, assuming a future

meaning, make a periphrastic future tense (942). Their corresponding feminine is in trī.
a. The root has regularly the guṇa-strengthening. A union-vowel i (very rarely, one of
another character) is often taken: as regards its presence or absence in the periphrastic future
forms, see above (943 a).
b. Without guṇa-change is only úṣṭṛ plough-ox (no proper agent-noun: apparently úkṣ-tṛ:
compare the nouns of relationship further on). The root grah has, as usual, ī — thus, grahītṛ́;
and the same appears in -tarītṛ́, -pavītṛ́, -marītṛ́, -varītṛ, -savītṛ. An u-vowel is taken instead by
tárutṛ and tarutṛ́, dhánutṛ, and sánutṛ; long in varūtṛ́; strengthened to o in manótṛ and manotṛ́.
From a reduplicated root comes vāvā́tṛ.
c. The accent, in the older language, is sometimes on the suffix and sometimes on the root;
or, from roots combined with prefixes, sometimes on the suffix and sometimes on the prefix.
d. In general, the accent on the root or prefix accompanies the participial use of the word;
but there are exceptions to this: in a very few instances (four), a word with accented suffix has
an accusative object; very much more often, accent on the root appears along with ordinary
noun value. The accent, as well as the form, of manótṛ is an isolated irregularity. Examples are:
jétā dhánāni winning treasures; yūyám mártaṁ çrótāraḥ ye listen to a mortal; but, on the other
hand, yaṁtā́ vásūni vidhaté bestowing good things on the pious;  and jétā jánānām conqueror of
peoples.
e. The formation of these nouns in tṛ from conjugation-stems, regular and frequent in the
later language, and not very rare in the Brāhmaṇas, is met with but once or twice in the Veda
(bodhayitṛ́ and codayitrī́, RV.). In néṣṭṛ a certain priest (RV. and later), is apparently seen the
aoristic s.
f. The words of relationship which, in whatever way, have gained the aspect of derivatives in
tṛ, are pitṛ́, mātṛ́, bhrā́tṛ, yā́tṛ, duhitṛ́, náptṛ, jā́mātṛ. Of these, only mātṛ́ and yā́tṛ are in
accordance with the ordinary rules of the formation in tṛ.
g. Instead of tṛ is found tur in one or two RV. examples: yaṁtúr, sthātúr.
h. Apparently formed by a suffix ṛ (or ar) are usṛ́, savyaṣṭhṛ, nánāndṛ, devṛ́, the last two
being words of relationship. For other words ending in ṛ, see 369.
1183. इन् in. This is another suffix which has assumed a primary aspect and use, while yet
evidently identical in real character with the frequent secondary suffix of the same form
denoting possession (below, 1230).

a. How far it had gained a primary value in the early language is not easy to determine.
Most of the words in in occurring in RV. and AV. are explainable as possessives; in many the
other value is possible, and in a few it is distinctly suggested: thus, kevalādín, bhadravādín,
nitodín, āçārāiṣín, ánāmin, vivyādhín; from a tense-stem, -açnuvin, -paçyin (late); with aoristic s,
-sakṣín; and, with reduplication, niyayín, vadāvadin. As the examples indicate, composition, both
with prefixes and with other elements, is frequent; and, in all cases alike, the accent is on the
suffix.
b. Later, the primary employment is unquestionable, and examples of it, chiefly in
composition, are frequent. The radical syllable is usually strengthened, a medial a being
sometimes lengthened and sometimes remaining unchanged. Thus, satyavādin truth-speaking,
abhibhāṣin addressing, manohārin soul-winning. In bhāvin has established itself a prevailingly
future meaning, about to be.
c. The use of an accusative object with words in in was noticed above (271 b).
1184. ईयस् īyas and इ iṣṭha. These suffixes, which, from forming intensive adjectives
corresponding to the adjective of root-form, have come to be used, within somewhat narrow
limits, as suffixes of adjective comparison, have been already sufficiently treated above, under
the head of comparison (466–470).
a. It may be further noticed that jyéṣṭha has in the older language (only two or three times
in RV.) the accent also on the final, jyeṣṭhá, and that its correlative also is kaniṣṭhá in the
oldest language; párṣiṣṭha is made from a secondary form of root, with aoristic s added.
b. When the comparative suffix has the abbreviated form yas (470 a), its y is never to be
read in the Veda as i.
c. No other suffixes make derivatives having participial value otherwise than in rare and
sporadic cases; those that remain, therefore, will be taken up mainly in the order of their
frequency and importance.
1185.  tra. With this suffix are formed a few adjectives, and a considerable number of
nouns, mostly neuter, and often having a specialized meaning, as signifying the means or
instrument of the action expressed by the root. The latter has usually the guṇa-strengthening,
but sometimes remains unchanged. The accent is various, but more often on the radical
syllable.
a. Here, as in certain other cases above, we have doubtless a suffix

originally secondary, made by adding a to the primary tṛ or tar (1182); but its use is in great
part that of a primary suffix.
b. Examples of neuter nouns are: gā́tra limb, páttra wing, pā́tra cup, yóktra bond, vástra
garment, çrótra ear; astrá missile, stotrá song of praise, potrá vesel; of more general meaning,
dáttra gift, kṣétra field, mū́tra urine, hotrá sacrifice. The words accented on the final have often
an abstract meaning: thus, kṣatrá authority, rāṣṭrá kingdom, çāstrá doctrine, sattrá sacrificial
session (also jñā́tra knowledge).
c. Masculines are: dáṅṣṭra tusk, mántra prayer, attrá (or atrá: 232) devourer, úṣṭra buffalo,
camel, and a few of questionable etymology, as mitrá friend, putrá son, vṛtrá foe. Mitrá and
vṛtrá are sometimes neuters even in the Veda, and mitra comes later to be regularly of that
gender.
d. Feminines (in trā) are: áṣṭrā goad, mā́trā measure, hótrā sacrifice (beside hotrá), daṅṣṭrā
(later, for dáṅṣṭra); nāṣṭrā́ destroyer.
e. Not seldom, a "union-vowel" appears before the suffix; but this is not usually the
equivalent of the union-vowel used with tṛ (above, 1182 a). For the words in itra have the
accent on i: thus, arítra (áritra AV., once) impelling, oar, khanítra shovel, pavítra sieve, janítra
birth-place, sanítra gift; and so -avitra, açítra, carítra, -taritra, dhamitra, dhavítra, bhavítra,
bharítra, vāditra (with causative root-strengthening), vahitra: the combination ítra has almost
won the character of an independent suffix. The preceding vowel is also in a few cases a
(sometimes apparently of the present-stem): thus, yájatra venerable, kṛntátra shred, gāyatrá (f.
-trī́) song, -damatra, pátatra wing; but also ámatra violent, vádhatra deadly weapon; and varatrā́
f . strap. Tárutra overcoming corresponds to tarutṛ́. Nákṣatra asterism is of very doubtful
etymology. Saṁskṛtatrá (RV., once) seems of secondary formation.
f. The words still used as adjectives in tra are mostly such as have union-vowels before the
suffix. A single example from a reduplicated root is johū́tra crying out.
g. A word or two in tri and tru may be added here, as perhaps of kindred formation with
those in tra: thus, áttri devouring, arcátri beaming, rā́tri or rā́trī night; çátru (çáttru: 232)
enemy.
1186. क ka. The suffix क ka is of very common use in secondary derivation (below, 1222);
whether it is directly added to roots is almost questionable: at any rate, extremely few primary
derivatives are made with it.
a. The words which have most distinctly the aspect of being made from roots are puṣka-,
-meka (√mi fix) , yaska n. pr., çúṣka dry, çlóka (√çru hear} noise, report, etc., and -sphāka
teeming; and stúkā flake and stoká drop seem to belong together to a root stu; rākā́ f., n. pr.,
may be added.

b. But ka enters, in its value as secondary, into the composition of certain suffixes reckoned
as primary: see aka and uka (above, 1180, 1181).
c. A few words in which ika and īka seem added to a root, though they are really of a
kindred formation with the preceding, may be most conveniently noticed here: thus, vṛ́çcika
(√vraçc) scorpion; ánīka (?) face, dṛ́çīka aspect, dṛ́bhīka n. pr., mṛḍīká grace, vṛdhīká increaser,
ā́çarīka and víçarīka gripes, -ṛjīka beaming, ṛṣīka; ṛkṣī́kā; and, from reduplicated root, parpharī́ka
scattering (?). Compare secondary suffix ka (below, 1222).
1187. य ya. It is altogether probable that a part of the derivatives made with this suffix are
not less entitled to be ranked as primary than some of those which are above so reckoned.
Such, however, are with so much doubt and difficulty to be separated from the great mass of
secondary derivatives made with the same suffix that it is preferred to treat them all together
under the head of secondary formation (below, 1210–13).
1188. र ra. With this suffix are made a large number of adjectives, almost always with weak
root-form, and usually with accent on the suffix. Also, a few words used as nouns, of various
gender. In some cases, the suffix is found with a preceding vowel, having the aspect of a union-
vowel.
a. Examples of adjectives in ra are: kṣiprá quick, chidrá split, turá strong, bhadrá pleasing,
çakrá mighty, çukrá bright, hiṅsrá injurious; with accent on the root, only gṛ́dhra greedy, túmra
stout, dhī́ra wise (secondary?), vípra inspired, túgra n. pr.
b. From roots with prefixes come only an example or two: thus, nicirá attentive, nímṛgra
joining on.
c. Nouns in ra are: masc., ájra field, vīrá man, vájra thunderbolt, çū́ra hero; neut., ágra
point, kṣīrá milk, rándhra hollow, riprá defilement; 
fem., dhā́rā stream, çíprā jaw, súrā
intoxicating drink.
The forms of this suffix with preceding vowel may best be considered here, although some
of them have nearly or quite gained the value of independent endings. Thus:
d. With ara are made a few rare words: the adjectives dravará running, patará flying, (with
prefix) nyocará suiting; and the nouns gambhára depth, tásara and trasara shuttle, sánara gain,
-ṛkṣara thorn; bhārvará and vāsará are doubtless of secondary formation; and the same thing
may be plausibly conjectured of others. As made with āra may be mentioned mandāra a tree,
mārjāra cat.
e. With ira are made a few words, some of which are in common use: thus, ajirá quick,
khadirá a tree, timira dark, dhvasirá stirring up, madirá pleasing, mudira cloud, badhirá deaf,
rucira bright, iṣirá

lively, ásira missile, sthávira firm; and sthira hard, and sphirá fat, with displacement of final
radical ā; also sarirá wave (usually salilá). With īra are made gabhīrá or gambhīrá profound
and çávīra mighty, and perhaps çárīra body.
f. With ura are made a few words, of some of which the secondary character is probable:
thus, aṅhurá (aṅhu-ra? ) narrow, ásura (ásu-ra? ) living, chidura tearing, bhan̄gurá breaking,
bhāsura shining, bhidura splitting, medura fat, yādura uniting, vithura tottering, vidura
knowing, vidhura lacking. With ūra, apparently, are made sthūrá stout (compare sthávira),
kharjū́ra a tree, mayū́ra peacock (or imitative?).
1189. ल la. This suffix is only another form of the preceding, exchanging with it in certain
words, in others prevalently or solely used from their first appearance.
a. Conspicuous examples of the interchange are çuklá, sthūlá, -miçla, çithilá, salilá.
b. Examples of the more independent use are: pālá protecting, ánila (or aníla) wind, tṛpála
joyous; later capala and tarala (said to be accented on the final), and harṣula (the same). Many
words ending in la are of obscure etymology.
1190. व va. Very few words of clear derivation are made with this suffix — too few to be
worth classifying. They are of various meaning and accent, and generally show a weak root-
form.
a. Thus: ṛkvá praising, ṛṣvá lofty, takvá quick, dhruvá fixed, pakvá ripe, padva going, yahvá
quick (?), çarvá n. pr., hrasvá short, çikvá artful, raṇvá joyful, ūrdhvá lofty, vákva twisting, ūrvá
stall; éva quick, course, áçva horse, srákva or sṛkva corner; and perhaps úlba caul; a feminine
is prúṣvā (TS. pṛ́ṣvā, AV. pruṣvā́); with union-vowel are made saciva companion, ámīva disease,
and vidhávā widov.
b. The words in va exhibit only in sporadic cases resolution of the ending into ua.
1191. िर ri. With this suffix are formed, directly or with preceding u, a small number of
derivatives.
a. Thus: án̄ghri or aṅhri foot, áçri edge, úsri dawn, tandri or -drī́ weariness, bhū́ri abundant,
ván̄kri rib, sūrí patron, -takri quick, vádhri eunuch, çubhrí beautiful, sthúri single (team); and,
with uri, jásuri exhausted, dā́çuri pious, bhāguri n. pr., sáhuri mighty; an̄gúri (or an̄gúli) finger.
1192.  ru. This suffix makes a few adjectives and neuter nouns, either directly or with a
preceding vowel.

a. Thus: áçru 'tear, cā́ru dear, dhārú sucking, bhīrú timid; — with preceding a-vowel: aráru
inimical, patáru flying, vandā́ru praising, píyāru scoffing, çarā́ru harming; — with preceding e,
tameru relaxed, maderú rejoicing, sanéru obtaining, himerú chilly, the evidently secondary
mitréru ally, and péru (of doubtful meaning).
b. The secondary suffix lu (see 1227 b) is apparently added to certain nouns in ā from
conjugation-stems, making derivatives that have a primary aspect: thus, patayālú flying,
spṛhayālu desiring.
1193. िव vi. By this suffix are made:
a. Two or three derivatives from reduplicated roots: jā́gṛvi awake, dā́dhṛvi sustaining, dī́divi
shining; and a very few other words; ghṛ́ṣvi lively, dhruví firm, jírvi worn out (AV.; elsewhere
jívri); -pharvī is doubtful.
b. Here may be mentioned cikitvít (RV., once), apparently made with a suffix vit from a
reduplicated root-form.
1194. ु snu. With this suffix, with or without a union-vowel, are made a few adjective
derivatives from roots, but also from causative stems.
a. From simple roots: direct, kṣeṣṇú perishable, -glāsnu sick, jiṣṇú victorious, dan̄kṣṇú
biting, bhūṣṇu thriving, ni-ṣatsnú sitting down, sthāsnu fixed; with union-vowel i, kariṣṇu,
kāçiṣṇu, kṣayiṣṇu, gamiṣṇú, grasiṣṇu, grahiṣṇu, cariṣṇú, -janiṣṇu, jayiṣṇu, tapiṣṇu, -trapiṣṇu, -
patiṣṇu, -bhaviṣṇu, bhrājiṣṇu, madíṣṇu, -maviṣṇu, yajiṣṇu, yāciṣṇu, -vadiṣṇu, vardhiṣṇu, -sahiṣṇu.
b. 
From 
secondary 
conjugation-stems: kopayiṣṇu, kṣapayiṣṇu, cyāvayiṣṇú, janayiṣṇu,
tāpayiṣṇu, namayiṣṇu, patayiṣṇu, poṣayiṣṇú, pārayiṣṇú, bodhayiṣṇu, mādayiṣṇú, yamayiṣṇú,
ropayiṣṇu, -vārayiṣṇu, -çocayiṣṇú; and jāgariṣṇu. An anomalous formation is ulbaniṣṇu.
c. These derivatives are freely compounded with prefixes: e. g. niṣatsnú, prajaniṣṇú,
abhiçocayiṣṇú, saṁvārayisṇu.
d. It is not unlikely that the s of this suffix is originally that of a stem, to which nu was
added. Such a character is still apparent in kraviṣṇú craving raw flesh (kravis); and also in
vadhasnú, vṛdhasnú (?), and prathasnu (?).
1195.  sna. Extremely few words have this ending.
a. It is seen in tīkṣṇá sharp, and perhaps in çlakṣṇá, -rūkṣṇá, mārtsna; and in geṣṇa and
deṣṇá (usually trisyllabic: daīṣṇa) gift. Unless in the last, it is not found preceded by i; but it
has (like snu, above) a before it in vadhasná deadly weapon, karásna fore-arm; nadīṣṇa skilled
seems to be secondary. Feminines are mṛtsnā loam, jyotsnā moonlight.

1196. ु tnu. This suffix is used in nearly the same way with ु snu (above, 1194).
a. As used with simple roots, the t is generally capable of being considered the adscititious
t after a short root-final, to which nu is then added: thus, kṛtnú active, gatnú (? RV.), hatnú
deadly, -tatnu (?) stretching; and, from reduplicated roots, jigatnú hasting, 
and jighatnú
harming; but also dartnú bursting. Also, with union-vowel, dravitnú running, dayitnu (? LÇS.).
b. With causative stems: for example, drāvayitnú hasting, poṣayitnú nourishing, mādayitnú
intoxicating, tanayitnú and stanayitnú thunder, sūdayitnú flowing, -āmayitnú sickening.
c. With preceding a, in pīyatnú scoffing, mehatnú a river, ā-rujatnú breaking into; and
kavatnú miserly (obscure derivation).
1197. स sa. The words ending in suffixal स sa, with or without preceding union-vowel, are a
heterogeneous group, and in considerable part of obscure derivation. Thus:
a. With sa simply: gṛtsa clever, jeṣá winning (rather, aoristic s? 1148j), -dṛkṣa looking, rukṣá
shining, rūkṣá rough; útsa n. fountain; bhīṣā́ f. fear (or from the secondary root bhīṣ).
b. With preceding i-vowel: taviṣá (f. táviṣī) strong, mahiṣá (f. máhiṣī) mighty, bhariṣá (?)
seeking booty; ṛjīṣá rushing, púrīṣa rubbish, manīṣā́ f. devotion; and compare rayīṣín (? SV.).
c. With preceding u-vowel: aruṣá (f. áruṣī) red, açúṣa ravenous, táruṣa overcomer, púruṣa
and mánuṣa (-us-a?) man; pīyū́ṣa biestings.
1198. अिस asi. A few words in the oldest language are made with a suffix having this form
(perhaps produced by the addition of i to as).
a. Thus, atasí vagabond, dharnasí firm, sānasí winning; and dhāsí m. drink, f. station, sarasí
(?) pool.
1199. अभ abha. A few names of animals, for the most part of obscure derivation, show this
ending.
a. Thus, vṛṣabhá and ṛṣabhá bull, çarabhá a certain fabulous animal, çerabha a certain
snake, gardabhá and rā́sabha ass; further, kanabha, karabha and kalabha, laṭabha, çalabha;
and, with other union-vowels, tuṇḍibha, nuṇḍibha, and kukkubha. The feminine, if occurring, is
i n ī; and kaṭabhī is found without corresponding masculine. AV. has the adjective sthūlabhá,
equivalent to sthūlá.
1200. A few words ending in the consonants t, d, j, etc., and for the most part of doubtful
root-connections, were given above, at 383k (3–5, 7); it is unnecessary to repeat them here.
Certain of those in at are perhaps related to the participles in ant (1172).
1201. A number of other primary suffixes are either set up by

the grammarians and supported with examples of questionable value, or are doubtfully
deducible from isolated words traceable to known roots, or from words of obscure connection.
a. A few such may be mentioned here: aṇḍa in karaṇḍa and váraṇḍa and certain unquotable
words (prakritized a-forms from the present participle); era and ora in unquotable words, and
elima (above, 966 d: perhaps a further derivative with secondary ima from era); mara (ma or
man with secondary ra added) in ghasmara, sṛmará, etc.; — sara in matsará, kara in púṣkara
and other obscure words, pa in púṣpa, stupá, stū́pa, and a number of other obscure words; and
so on.
B. Secondary Derivatives.
1202. Words of secondary derivation are made by the addition of further suffixes to stems
already ending in evident suffixes.
a. But also, as pointed out above (1137 b), to pronominal roots.
b. Further, in exceptional cases, to indeclinables, to case-forms, and to phrases: e. g.
antarvant, apitvá, paratastva, sahatva, sārvatrika, āikadhya, mā́maka, āmuṣmika, āmuṣyāyaṇá,
apsumánt, apsavyà, kiṁcanya, kiṁkartavyatā, kvācitka, nāstika, akiṁcinmaya.
1203. Changes of the stem. The stem to which the suffix is added is liable to certain
changes of form.
a. Before a suffix beginning with a vowel or with y (which in this respect is treated as if it
were i), final a- and i-vowels are regularly lost altogether, while a final u-vowel has the guṇa-
strengthening and becomes av; ṛ and o and āu (all of rare occurrence) are treated in
accordance with usual euphonic rule.
b. An u-vowel also sometimes remains unstrengthened: see 1208 e.
c. A final n is variously treated, being sometimes retained, and sometimes lost, even along
with a preceding a; and sometimes an a is lost, while the n remains: thus, vṛṣaṇvant, vṛṣaṇa,
vṛṣa, vrṛṣatva, vṛṣṇya, from vṛṣan. Of a stem ending in ant, the weak form, in at, is regularly
taken: thus, vāivasvata (vivasvant).
d. In general, the masculine form of a primitive stem is that from which a further secondary
derivative is made. But there are not very rare cases in which the feminine is taken instead;
examples are satītva, bhāryātva, pranītātvá, bhāratīvant, rakṣāvant, priyāvant . On the other
hand, a final long vowel — ī, much more rarely ā — generally of a feminine stem, is sometimes
shortened in derivation: thus, yājyàvant, praçākhavant, goṣátama, vaçátamā, sadhanitvá, jaratikā,
annā-

dítamā (cf. 471 b), rohinitvá (TB.; -nītvá ÇB.), pṛhivitvá, pratipatnivat, sárasvativant.
e. As was pointed out above (111 c, d), the combination of a secondary suffix with a stem is
sometimes made according to the rules of external combination. Such cases are pointed out
under the suffixes īya (1215 e), ka (1222 m), maya (1225 a), min (1231 b), vin (1232 c), vant
(1233 i), van (1234 c), mant (1235 f), tva (1239 c), taya (1245 a), tya (1245 c), tana (1245 i).
1204. The most frequent change in secondary derivation is the vṛddhi-strengthening of an
initial syllable of the stem to which a suffix is added.
a. The strengthened syllable may be of any character: radical, of a prefix, or of the first
member of a compound: thus, āçviná (açvín), sāumyá (sóma), pā́rthiva (pṛthivī́), āmitrá (amítra),
sā́mrājya (samrā́j), sāúkṛtya (sukṛtá), māitrāvaruṇá (mitrā́váruṇā), āuccāiḥçravasá (uccāíḥçravas).
As to the accompanying accent, see the next paragraph.
b. If a stem begins with a consonant followed by y or v, the semivowel is sometimes
vriddhied, as if it were i or u, and the resulting āi or āu has y or v further added before the
succeeding vowel.
c. This is most frequent where the y or v belongs to a prefix — as ni, vi, su — altered
before a following initial vowel: thus, nāiyāyika from nyāya (as if niyāya), vāiyaçvá from vyàçva
(as if viyaçva) , sāúvaçvya from sváçva (as if suvaçva); but it occurs also in other cases, as
sāuvará from svára, çāuva from çvan, against svāyambhuva (svayambhū), and so on. AV. has
irregularly kāveraká from kúvera (as if from kvéra, without the euphonic y inserted).
d. This strengthening takes place especially, and very often, before the suffixes a and ya;
also regularly before i, āyana, eya (with ineya), and later īya; before the compound aka and ika,
and later aki; and, in single sporadic examples before, na, ena, ra, and tva (?): see these
various suffixes below.
e. Sometimes an unstrengthened word is prefixed to one thus strengthened, as if the
composition were made after instead of before the strengthening: e. g. indradāivatya having
Indra as divinity (instead of āindradevatya), caramaçāirṣika with head to the west , jīvalāukika
belonging to the world of the living , antarbhāuma within the earth, somārāudra, gurulāghava
(cf. tāmasaṁ guṇalakṣaṇam M. xii. 35). But especially when the first word is of numeral value:
a s çatáçārada of a hundred years , pañcaçāradī́ya, trisāṁvatsara, bahuvārṣika, aṣṭavārṣika,
anekavarṣasāhasra, daçasāhasra, trisāhasrī, tripāuruṣa, caturādhyāyī or -yikā of four chapters,
etc. etc.

f. More often, both members of a compound word have the initial strengthening: e. g.
sāumapāuṣṇá, kāúrupāñcāla, cāturvāidya, āihalāukika, āikabhāutika, trāisṭubjāgata, yājurvāidika .
Such cases are not rare.
g. The guṇa-strengthening (except of a final u-vowel: 1203 a) is only in the rarest cases an
accompaniment of secondary derivation. Exceptions are dvayá and trayá and náva (1200 i),
bheṣajá and devá (1209 j), dróna (1223 g), çekhara (1226 a).
1205. Accent. a. The derivatives with initial vṛddhi-strengthening always have their accent
on either the first or the last syllable. And usually it is laid, as between these two situations, in
such a way as to be furthest removed from the accent of the primitive; yet, not rarely, it is
merely drawn down upon the suffix from the final of the latter; much less often, it remains upon
an initial syllable without change. Only in the case of one or two suffixes is the distinction
between initial and final accent connected with any difference in the meaning and use of the
derivatives (see below, suffix eya: 1216).
b. No other general rules as to accent can be given. Usually the suffix takes the tone, or
else this remains where it was in the primitive; quite rarely, it is thrown back to the initial
syllable (as in derivation with initial vṛddhi); and in a single case ( tā: 1237) it is drawn down to
the syllable preceding the suffix.
1206. Meaning. a. The great mass of secondary suffixes are adjective-making: they form
from nouns adjectives indicating appurtenance or relation, of the most indefinite and varied
character. But, as a matter of course, this indefiniteness often undergoes specialization: so,
particularly, into designation of procedure or descent, so that distinctive patronymic and
metronymic and gentile words are the result; or, again, into the designation of possession.
Moreover, while the masculines and feminines of such adjectives are employed as appellatives,
the neuter is also widely used as an abstract, denoting the quality expressed attributively by
the adjective; and neuter abstracts are with the same suffixes made from adjectives. There are
also special suffixes (very few) by which abstracts are made directly, from adjective or noun.
b. A few suffixes make no change in the part of speech of the primitive, but either change
its degree (diminution and comparison), or make other modifications, or leave its meaning not
sensibly altered.
1207. The suffixes will be taken up below in the following order. First, the general
adjective-making suffixes, beginning with those of most frequent use (a, ya and its connections,
i, ka); then, those of specific possessive value ( in, vant and mant, and their connections); then,
the abstract-making ones (tā and tva, and their connections); then, the suffixes of comparison
etc.; and finally, those by which derivatives are made only or almost only from particles.

a. For convenience of reference, a list of them in their order as treated is here added:
a
1206–9
ya
1210–13
iya
1214
īya
1215
eya, eyya
1216
enya
1217
āyya
1218
āyana
1219
āyī
1220
i, aki
1221
ka, aka, ika
1222
na, āna, īna, ina, ena
1223
ma, ima, mna
1224
maya
1225
ra, ira, etc.
1226
la, lu
1227
va, vala, vaya, vya
1226
ça
1229
in
1230
min
1231
vin
1232
vant
1233
van
1234
mant
1235
tā
1237
tāti, tāt
1238
tva, tvatā
1239
tvana
1240
tara, tama
1242
ra, ma
"
tha
"
titha
"
taya
1245
tya
"
ta
"
na
"
tana, tna
"
vat
"
kaṭa
"
vana, ā
"
1208. अ a. With this suffix are made an immensely large class of derivatives, from nouns or

from adjectives having a noun-value. Such derivatives are primarily and especially adjectives,
denoting having a relation or connection (of the most various kind) with that denoted by the
more primitive word. But they are also freely used substantively: the masculine and feminine as
appellatives, the neuter, especially and frequently, as abstract. Often they have a patronymic or
gentile value.
a. The regular and greatly prevailing formation is that which is accompanied with vṛddhi-
strengthening of the first syllable of the primitive word, simple or compound. Examples of this
formation are:
b. From primitives ending in consonants: with the usual shift of accent, āyasá of metal
(áyas) , mānasá relating to the mind (mánas) , sāumanasá friendliness (sumánas) , brāhmaṇá
priest (bráhman) , hāimavatá from the Himalaya (himávant) , ān̄girasá of the Angiras family
(án̄giras); hā́stina elephantine (hastín), mā́ruta pertaining to the Maruts (marút); — with accent
thrown forward from the final upon the suffix, çāradá autumnal, vāirājá relating to the virā́j,
pāuṣṇá belonging to Pūshán; gāirikṣitá son of Girikshít; — with accent unchanged, mā́nuṣa
descendant of Mánus.
c. The suffix is added (as above instanced) to the middle stem-form of stems in vant; it is
added to the weakest in mā́ghona and vā́rtraghna; the ending in remains unchanged; an usually
does the same, but some-

times loses its a, as in pāuṣṇá, trāivṛṣṇá, dāçarājñá; and sometimes its n, as in brāhmá, āukṣá,
bārhatsāma.
d. From primitives in ṛ: jāítra victorious (jetṛ́ or jétṛ conqueror), tvāṣṭrá relating to Tváshtar,
sāvitrá descendant of the sun (savitṛ́), āúdbhetra, pāitra.
e. From primitives in u: usually with guṇa-strengthening of the u, as vāsavá relating to the
Vásus, ārtavá concerning the seasons (ṛtú) , dānavá child of Dānu (dā́nu) , sāindhavá from the
Indus (síndhu); — but sometimes without, as mā́dhva full of sweets (mádhu), pārçva side (párçu
rib), pāidvá belonging to Pedú, tā́nva of the body (tanū́), yā́dva of Yádu.
f. From primitives in i and ī, which vowels are supplanted by the added suffix: pā́rthiva
earthly (pṛthivī́), sārasvatá of the Sárasvatī, āindrāgná belonging to Indra and Agni  (indrāgnī́);
pā́n̄kta five-fold (pan̄ktí) , nāirṛtá belonging to Nírṛti, pārthuraçmá of Pṛthuraçmi, pāçupatá of
Paçupáti.
g. From primitives in ā, which in like manner disappears: yāmuná of the Yamúnā, sāraghá
honey etc. (sarághā bee), kānīná natural child (kanī́nā girl).
h. A large number (more than all the rest together) from primitives in a, of which the final
is replaced by the suffix: for example, with the usual shift of accent, āmitrá inimical (amítra
enemy) , vāruṇá of Váruṇa, vāiçvadevá belonging to all the gods (viçvádeva) , nāirhastá
handlessness (nírhasta) , vāiçvadevá descendant of Vyàçva; gā́rdabha asinine (gardabhá) , dāíva
divine (devá), mā́dhyaṁdina meridional (madhyáṁdina), pāútra grandchild (putrá son), sāúbhaga
good fortune (subhága), vā́dhryaçva of Vadhryaçvá's race; with unchanged accent (comparatively
few), vāsantá vernal (vasantá spring) , māitrá Mitrá's, ātithigvá of Atithigvá's race, dāívodāsa
Dívodāsa's. In a few instances, ya is replaced by the suffix: thus, sāura, pāuṣá, yājñavalka.
i. The derivatives of this last form are sometimes regarded as made by internal change,
without added suffix. Considering, however, that other final vowels are supplanted by this
suffix, that a disappears as stem-final also before various other suffixes of secondary derivation,
and that no examples of derivation without suffix are quotable from primitives of any other final
than a, it seems far too violent to assume here a deviation from the whole course of Indo-
European word-making.
j. Adjectives of this formation make their feminines in ī (see 332 a).
1209. The derivatives made by adding अ a without vṛddhi-change of the initial syllable are
not numerous, and are in considerable part, doubtless, of inorganic make, results of the transfer
to an a-declension of words of other finals.

a. A number of examples of stems in a made by transfer were noticed above (399). The
cases of such transition occur most frequently in composition (1315): thus, further, apa- (for ap
or āp water), -ṛca, -nara, etc.; from stems in an, -aha, -vṛṣa, etc., but also -ahna and -vṛṣṇa and
vṛ́ṣaṇa; from stems in i, -an̄gula, -rātra, etc.; from the weakest forms of añc-stems (407) uccá,
nīcá, parācá, etc.
b. Also occurring especially in composition, yet likewise as simple words often enough to
have an independent aspect, are derivatives in a from nouns in as (rarely is, us): thus, for
example, tamasá, rajasá, payasá, brahmavarcasá, sarvavedasá, devāinasá, paruṣá, tryāyuṣá , and
probably mánuṣa.
c. Similar derivatives from adjectives in in are reckoned by the grammarians as made with
the suffix ina: thus, malina polluted, parameṣṭhína etc. (see 441 b).
d. A number of words formed with the so-called suffix anta are evident transfers from stems
in ant. A few of them are found even from the earliest period: thus, pā́nta draught, çvāntá (?),
vasantá spring, hemantá winter, veçantá etc. tank, jīvantī́ a certain healing plant; and others
occur later, as jayanta, taranta, madhumanta , etc. They are said to be accented on the final.
e. From añc-stems (407) are made a few nouns ending in k-a: thus, ánūka, ápāka, upā́ka,
prátīka, parāká, etc.
f. From stems in ṛ, hotrá, netrá, neṣṭrá, potrá, praçāstrá, etc., from titles of priests; also
dhātrá, bhrātrá, etc.
g. Other scattering cases are: savidyutá, āvyuṣá, vī́rudha, kákuda, kakubhá, açúṣa, bhūmyá,
sakhyá, ádhipatya, jāspatyá, araṭvá, pānḍvá.
h. The Vedic gerundives in tva (tua), made by addition of a to abstract noun-stems in tu,
have been already (966 a) fully given.
i . Trayá and dvayá come with guna-strengthening from numeral stems; náva new in like
manner from nú now; and ántara apparently from antár.
j. Bheṣajá medicine is from bhiṣáj healer, with guṇa-change; and probably devá heavenly,
divine, god, in like manner from div sky, heaven (there is no "root div shine" in the language).
1210. य ya. With this suffix are made a very large class of words, both in the old language
and later.
a. The derivatives in ya exhibit a great and perplexing variety of form, connection, and
application; and the relations of the suffix to others containing a ya-element — iya, īya, eya,
āyya, eyya, enya — are also in part obscure and difficult. In the great majority of instances in
the oldest language, the ya when it follows a consonant is dissyllabic in

metrical value, or is to be read as ia. Thus, in RV., 266 words (excluding compounds) have ia,
and only 75 have ya always; 46 are to be read now with ia and now with ya, but many of these
have ya only in isolated cases. As might be expected, the value ia is more frequent after a
heavy syllable: thus, in RV., there are 188 examples of ia and 27 of ya after such a syllable,
and 78 of ia and 96 of ya after a light syllable (the circumflexed yà — that is to say, ía —
being, as is pointed out below, 1212 l, more liable to the resolution than ya or yá). It must be
left for further researches to decide whether in the ya are not included more than one suffix,
with different accent, and different quantity of the i-element; or with an a added to a final i of
the primitive. It is also matter for question whether there is a primary as well as a secondary
suffix ya; the suffix at least comes to be used as if primary, in the formation of gerundives and
in that of action-nouns: but it is quite impossible to separate the derivatives into two such
classes, and it has seemed preferable therefore to treat them ail together here.
b. The derivatives made with ya may be first divided into those which do and those which
do not show an accompanying vṛddhi-increment of the initial syllable.
c. Adjectives in ya, of both these divisions, make their feminines regularly in yā. But in a
number of cases, a feminine in ī is made, either alone or beside one in yā: e. g. cāturmāsī,
āgniveçī, çāṇḍilī, ā́rī (and ā́ryā), dāívī (and dāívyā), sāumī (and sāumyā); dhīrī́, çīrṣaṇī, svarī, etc.
1211. Derivatives in य ya with initial vṛddhi-strengthening follow quite closely, in form and
meaning, the analogy of those in अ a (above, 1208). They are, however, decidedly less common
than the latter (in Veda, ahout three fifths as many).
a. Examples are : with the usual shift of accent, dāívya divine (devá) , pā́litya grayness
(palitá) , grāívya cervical (grīvā́) , ā́rtvijya priestly office (ṛtvíj) , gā́rhapatya householder's
(gṛhápati), jā́narājya kingship (janarā́j), sā́ṁgrāmajitya victory in battle (saṁgrāmajít), sāúvaçvya
wealth in houses (sváçva) , āúpadraṣṭrya witness (upadraṣṭṛ́) ; ādityá Aditya (áditi) , sāumyá
relating to sóma, ātithyá hospitality (átithi) , prājāpatyá belonging to Prajā́pati, vāimanasyá
mindlessness (vímanas), sā́hadevya descendant of Sahádeva; — with accent thrown forward from
the final upon the ending, lāukyá of the world (loká), kāvyá of the Kaví-race, ārtvyá descendant
of Ritú, vāyavyá belonging to the wind (vāyú), rāivatyá wealth (revánt); with unchanged accent
(very few), ā́dhipatya lordship (ádhipati), çrāíṣṭhya excellence (çréṣṭha), vāíçya belonging to the
third class (víç people), pāúṁsya manliness (púṁs).

b. The AV. has once nāirbādhyà, with circumflexed final; if not an error, it is doubtless
made through nāirbādha; vāiṣṇavyāú (VS. i. 12) appears to be dual fem. of vāiṣṇavī́.
1212. Derivatives in य ya without initial vṛddhi-strengthening are usually adjectives, much
less often (neuter, or, in या yā, feminine) abstract nouns. They are made from every variety of
primitive, and are very numerous (in Veda, three or four times as many as the preceding class).
a. The general mass of these words may be best divided according to their accent, into: 1.
Words retaining the accent of the primitive; 2. Words with retracted accent; 3. Words with
acute yá (iá); 4. Words with circumflexed yà (ía). Finally may be considered the words,
gerundives and action-nouns, which have the aspect of primary derivatives.
1. b. Examples of derivatives in ya retaining the accent of their primitives are: áçvya equine
(áçva) , án̄gya of the limbs (án̄ga) , múkhya foremost (múkha mouth) , ávya ovine (ávi) , gávya
bovine (gó), víçya of the people (víç), dúrya of the door (dúr), nárya manly (nṛ́) , vṛ́ṣṇya virile
(vṛ́ṣan), svarā́jya autocracy (svarā́j), suvī́rya wealth in retainers (suvī́ra) , viçvájanya of all men,
viçvádevya of all the gods ( viçvádeva), mayū́raçepya peacock-tailed.
c. In the last words, and in a few others, the ya appears to be used (like ka, 1222 h: cf.
1212 m) as a suffix simply helping to make a possessive compound: and so further suhástya
(beside 
the 
equivalent suhásta)
, mádhuhastya, 
dáçamāsya, 
miçrádhānya, 
anyódarya,
samānodarya.
2. d. Examples with retraction of the accent to the first syllable (as in derivation with
vṛddhi-increment) are: káṇṭhya guttural (kaṇṭhá) , skándhya humeral (skandhá) , vrátya of a
ceremony (vratá), méghya in the clouds (meghá), pítrya of the Fathers (pitṛ́), prátijanya adverse
(pratijaná). Hiraṇyáya of gold (híraṇya), is anomalous both in drawing the accent forward and in
retaining the final a of the primitive; and gavyáya and avyáya (also ávyaya) are to be compared
with it as to formation.
3. e. Examples with acute accent on the suffix are: divyá heavenly (dív), satyá true (sánt),
vyāghryá tigrine (vyāghrá), kavyá wise (kaví), grāmyá of the village (grā́ma), somyá relating to
the sóma, anenasyá sinlessness (anenás), adakṣiṇyá not fit for dákṣiṇā.
4. f. Of derivatives ending in circumflexed yà (which in the Veda are considerably more
numerous than all the three preceding classes together), examples are as follows:

g. From consonant-stems: viçyà of the clan (RV.: víç), hṛdyá of the heart (hṛ́d), vidyutyà of
the lightning (vidyút), rājanyà of the royal class (rā́jan), doṣaṇyà of the arm (doṣán), çīrṣaṇyà of
the head (çīrṣán) , karmaṇyà active (kárman) , dhanvanyà of the plain (dhánvan) , namasyà
reverend (námas) , tvacasyà cuticular (tvácas) , barhiṣyà of barhís, āyuṣyà giving life (ā́yus),
bhasadyà of the buttocks (bhasád) , prācyà eastern (prā́ñc), etc. Of exceptional formation is
aryamyà intimate (aryamán), with which doubtless belong sātmya (sātman) and sākṣya (sākṣin).
h. From u-stems: hanavyà of the jaws (hánu), vāyavya belonging to Vāyú, paçavyà relating
to rattle (paçú), iṣavyà relating to arrows (íṣu), madhavyà of the sweet (mádhu), apsavyà of the
waters (apsú lo.), rajjavyà of rope (rájju); çaravyā̀ f. arrow (çáru, do.); and there may be added
nāvyà navigable (especially in fem., nāvyā̀ navigable stream: nāú boat). The RV. has prāçavyà to
be partaken of (pra+√aç), without any corresponding noun prāçu; and also ūrjavyà rich in
nourishment (ūrj), without any intermediate ūrju.
i. Under this head belong, as was pointed out above (964), the so-called gerundives in tavyà,
as made by the addition of yà to the infinitive noun in tu. They are wholly wanting in the oldest
language, and hardly found in later Vedic, although still later tavya wins the value of a primary
suffix, and makes numerous verbal derivatives.
j. From i- and ī-stems hardly any examples are to be quoted. VS. has dundubhyà from
dundubhí.
k. From a-stems: svargyà heavenly (svargá), devatyà relating to a deity (devátā), prapathyà
guiding (prapathá) , budhnyà fundamental (budhná) , jaghanyà hindmost (jaghána) , varuṇyà
Váruna's, vīryà might (vīrá), udaryà abdominal (udára), utsyà of the fountain (útsa); and from ā-
stems, urvaryà of cultivated land (urvárā), svāhyà relating to the exclamation svā́hā.
l. The circumflexed yà is more generally resolved (into ía) than the other forms of the suffix:
thus, in RV. it is never to be read as ya after a heavy syllable ending with a consonant; and
even after a light one it becomes ía in more than three quarters of the examples.
m. There are a few cases in which yà appears to be used to help make a compound with
governing preposition (next chapter, 1310: of. 1212 c): thus, apikakṣyà about the arm-pit,
upapakṣyà upon the sides, udāpyà up-stream; and perhaps upatṛṇyà lying in the grass (occurs
only in voc.). But, with other accent, ánvāntrya through the entrails, úpamāsya in each month,
abhinabhyá up to the clouds, antaḥparçavyá between the ribs, ádhigartya on the chariot sent;  of
unknown accent, adhihastya, anupṛṣṭhya, anunāsikya, anuvaṅçya .
1213. The derivatives in य ya as to which it may be

questioned whether they are not, a least in part, primary derivatives from the beginning, are
especially the gerundives, together with action-nouns coincident with these in form; in the later
language, the gerundive-formation (above, 963) comes to be practically a primary one.
a. In RV. occur about forty instances of gerundives in ya, of tolerably accordant form: the
root usually unstrengthened (but cétya, bhávya, -hávya, márjya, yódhya; also -mā́dya, -vā́cya,
bhāvyá); the accent on the radical syllable when the word is simple, or compounded with
prepositions: thus, praçásya, upasádya, vihávya (but usually on the final after the negative
prefix: thus, anāpyá, anapavṛjyá) — exceptions are only bhāvyá and the doubtful ākāyyà; the ya
resolved into ia in the very great majority of occurrences; a final short vowel followed by t (in
-ítya, -kṛtya, -çrútya, -stútya, and the reduplicated carkṛ́tya, beside carkṛ́ti: not in návya and
-hávya), and ā changed to e (in -deya only). If regarded as secondary, they might be made with
ya, in accordance with other formations by this suffix, in part from the root-noun, as anukṛ́t-ya,
in part from derivatives in a, as bhāvyá (from bhāva).
b. The AV. has a somewhat smaller number (about twenty-five) of words of a like formation;
but also a considerable group (fifteen) of derivatives in yà with the same value: thus, for
example, ādyà eatable, kāryà to be done, samāpyà to be obtained, atitāryà to be overpassed,
nīvibhāryà to be carried in the apron , prathamavāsyà to be first worn, These seem more
markedly of secondary origin: and especially such forms as parivargyà to be avoided, avimokyá
not to be gotten rid of , where the guttural reversion clearly indicates primitives in ga and ka
(216 h).
c. Throughout the older language are of common occurrence neuter abstract nouns of the
same make with the former of these classes. They are rarely found except in composition (in
AV., only cítya and stéya as simple), and are often used in the dative, after the manner of a
dative infinitive. Examples are: brahmajyéya, vasudéya, bhāgadhéya, pūrvapéya, çataséya,
abhibhū́ya, devahū́ya, mantraçrútya, karmakṛ́tya, vṛtratū́rya, hotṛvū́rya, ahihátya, sattrasádya,
çirṣabhídya, brahmacárya, nṛṣáhya. Of exceptional form are ṛtódya (√vad) and sahaçéyya (√çī);
of exceptional accent, sadhástutya. And AV. has one example, raṇyà, with circumflexed final.
d. Closely akin with these, in meaning and use, is a smaller class of feminines in yā́: thus,
kṛtyā́, vidyā́, ityā́, agnicityā́, vājajityā́, muṣṭihatyā́, devayajyā́ , etc.
e. There remain, of course, a considerable number of less classifiable words, both nouns and
adjectives, of which a few from the older language may be mentioned, without discussion of
their relations: thus, sū́rya (with

fem. sūryā́), ā́jya, púṣya, nábhya; yújya, gṛ́dhya, írya, aryá  and ā́rya, márya, mádhya.
The suffixes apparently most nearly akin with ya may best be next taken up.
1214. इय iya. This suffix is virtually identical with the preceding, being but another written
form of the same thing. It is used only after two consonants, where the direct addition of य ya
would create a combination of difficult utterance. It has the same variety of accent with ya.
Thus:
a. With accent íya (= ía or yà): for example, abhríya (also abhriyá) from the clouds (abhrá),
kṣatríya having authority (kṣatrá) , yajñíya reverend (yajñá) , hotríya libational (hótrā) , amitríya
inimical (amítra).
b. With accent iyá (= ía or yà): for example, agriyá (also agríya) foremost (ágra) , indriyá
Indra's (later, sense: índra), kṣetriyá of the field (kṣétra).
c. With accent on the primitive: çrótriya learned (çrótra), ṛ́tviya (also ṛtvíya) in season (ṛtú).
1215. ईय īya. This suffix also is apparently by origin a ya (īa) of which the first element has
maintained its long quantity by the interposition of a euphonic y. It is accented always on the ī́.
a. In RV. occur, of general adjectives, only ārjikī́ya and gṛhamedhī́ya, and examples in the
later Vedic are very few: e. g. parvatī́ya mountainous (AV., beside RV. parvatyà). In the
Brāhmaṇas are found a number of adjectives, some of them from phrases (first words of verses
and the like): thus, anyarāṣṭrī́ya, pan̄cavātī́ya, mārjālī́ya, kayāçubhīya, svāduṣkilīya, apohiṣṭhīya ,
etc.
b. It was pointed out above (965) that derivative adjectives in īya from action-nouns in ana
begin in later Veda and in Brāhmaṇa to be used gerundivally, and are a recognized formation
as gerundives in the classical language. But adjectives in anīlya without gerundive character are
also common.
c. Derivatives in īya with initial vṛddhi are sometimes made in the later language: e. g.
pārvatīya, pāitāputrīya, āparapaksīya, vāirakīya.
d. The pronominal possessives madīya etc. (516 a) do not occur either in Veda or in
Brāhmaṇa; but the ordinals dvitī́ya etc. (487 b, c: with fractional tṛ́tīya and túrīya: 488 a) are
found from the earliest period.
e. The possessives bhagavadīya and bhavadīya, with the final of the primitive made sonant,
have probably had their form determined by the pronominal possessives in -dīya.

1216. एय eya. With this suffix, accompanied by vṛddhi-increment of an initial syllable, are
made adjectives, often having a patronymic or metronymic value. Their neuter is sometimes
used as abstract noun. The accent rests usually on the final in adjectives of descent, and on the
first syllable in others.
a. Examples are: ārṣeyá descendant of a sage (ṛ́ṣi), jānaçruteyá son of Jānacruti, sārameyá
of Sarámā's race, çātavaneyá Çatavani's descendant, rāthajiteyá son of Rathajít; ā́sneya of the
blood (asán), vā́steya of the bladder (vastí), pāúruṣeya coming from man (púruṣa), pāitṛsvaseya
of a paternal aunt (pitṛsvasṛ), etc.
b. A more than usual proportion of derivatives in eya come from primitives in i or ī; and
probably the suffix first gained its form by addition of ya to a gunated i, though afterward used
independently.
c. The gerundive etc. derivatives in ya (above, 1213) from ā-roots end in éya; and, besides
such, RV. etc. have sabhéya from sabhā́, and didṛkṣéya worth seeing, apparently from the
desiderative noun didṛkṣā́, after their analogy. M. has once adhyeya as gerund of √i.
d. Derivatives in the so-called suffix ineyá — as bhāgineyá, jyāiṣṭhineya, kāniṣṭhineya — are
doubtless made upon proximate derivatives in -inī (fem.).
e. In eyya (i. e. eyia) end, besides the neuter abstract sahaçéyya (above, 1213 c), the
adjective of gerundival meaning stuṣéyya (with aoristic s added to the root), and çapatheyyà
curse-bringing (or accursed), from çapátha.
1217. ए enya. This suffix is doubtless secondary in origin, made by the addition of य ya to
derivatives in a na-suffix; but, like others of similar origin, it is applied in some measure
independently, chiefly in the older language, where it has nearly the value of the later anīya
(above, 1215 b), as making gerundival adjectives.
a. The y of this suffix is almost always to be read as vowel, and the accent is (except in
váreṇya) on the e: thus -énia.
b. The gerundives have been all given above, under the different conjugations to which they
attach themselves (966 b, 1019 b, 1038). The RV. has also two non-gerundival adjectives,
vīréṇya manly (vīrá), and kīrténya famous (kīrtí), and TS. has anabhiçastenyá (abhíçasti); vijenyà
(RV.) is a word of doubtful connections; çikṣeṇya instructive is found in a Sūtra; prāvṛṣeṇya of
the rainy season occurs later.

1218. आ āyya. With this suffix are made gerundival adjectives, almost only in RV. They
have been noticed above (966 c). The ending is everywhere to be read as ā́yia.
a. A few adjectives without gerundival value, and neuter abstracts, also occur: thus,
bahupā́yya protecting many, nṛpā́yya men-guarding; kuṇḍapā́yya, and purumā́yya, proper names;
pūrvapā́yya first drink, mahayā́yya enjoyment; — and rasā́yya nervous, and uttamā́yya summit,
contain no verbal root. Alā́yya is doubtful; also ākāyyà, which its accent refers to a different
formation, along with prahāyyà (AV.: √hi) messenger, and pravāyyà (AV.), of doubtful value.
1219. आयन āyana. In the Brāhmaṇas and later, patronymics made by this suffix are not rare.
They come from stems in, अ a, and have vṛddhi-strengthening of the first syllable, and accent
on the final.
a. In RV., the only example of this formation is kāṇvāyana (voc.: káṇva); AV. has in metrical
parts dākṣāyaṇá and the fem. rāmāyaṇī́; and āmuṣyāyaṇá son of so-and-so (516) in its prose;
ÇB. has rājastambā́yana beside -bāyaná. The RV. name ukṣaṇyā́yana is of a different make,
elsewhere unknown.
1220. आयी āyī. Only a very few words are made with this suffix, namely agnā́yī (agní) Agni's
wife, vṛṣākapāyī wife of Vrishā́kapi; and later pūtakrātayī, and manāyī Manu's wife (but manāvī́
ÇB.).
a. They seem to be feminines of a derivative in a made with vṛddhi-increment of the final i
of the primitive.
1221. इ i. Derivatives made with this suffix are patronymics from nouns in a. The accent
rests on the initial syllable, which has the vṛddhi-strengthening.
a. In RV. are found half-a-dozen patronymics in i: for example, ā́gniveçi, pāúrukutsi,
prā́tardani, sā́ṁvaraṇi; AV. has but one, prā́hrādi; in the Brāhmaṇas they are more common:
thus, in AB., sāuyavasi, jānaṁtapi, āruṇi, jānaki , etc. A single word of other value — sā́rathi
charioteer (sarátham) — is found from RV. down.
b. The words made with the so-called suffix aki — as vāiyāsaki descendant of Vyāsa — are
doubtless properly derivatives in i from others in ka or aka. That the secondary suffix ika is
probably made by addition of ka to a derivative in i is pointed out below (1222 j).
c. RV. has tápuṣi, apparently from tápus with a secondary i added, and the n. pr. çucantī́;
bhuvantí is found in B., and jīvanti later.
1222. क ka. This is doubtless originally one of the class of suffixes forming adjectives of
appurtenance. And

that value it still has in actual use; yet only in a small minority of occurrences. It has been, on
the one hand, specialized into an element forming diminutives; and, on the other hand, and
much more widely, attenuated into an element without definable value, added to a great many
nouns and adjectives to make others of the same meaning — this last is, even in the Veda, and
still more in the later language, its chief office.
a. Hence, ka easily associates itself with the finals of derivatives to which it is attached,
and comes to seem along with them an integral suffix, and is further used as such. Of this
origin are doubtless, as was seen above (1180, 1181), the so-called primary suffixes uka and
aka; and likewise the secondary suffix ika (below; j).
b. The accent of derivatives in ka varies — apparently without rule, save that the words
most plainly of diminutive character have the tone usually on the suffix.
c. Examples (from the older language) of words in which the suffix has an adjective-making
value are: ántaka (ánta) end-making, bálhīka (bálhi) of Balkh, āṇḍī́ka (āṇḍá) egg-bearing, sūcī́ka
(sūcī́) stinging, urvāruká fruit of the gourd (urvārú) , paryāyiká (paryāyá) strophic; from
numerals, ekaká, dvaká, triká, áṣṭaka; tṛ́tīyaka of the third day; from pronoun-stems, asmā́ka
ours, yuṣmā́ka yours, mámaka mine (516 d); from prepositions, ántika near, ánuka following,
ávakā a plant (later adhika, utka); and, with accent retracted to the initial syllable (besides
áṣṭaka and tṛ́tīyaka, already given), rū́paka (rūpá) with form, bábhruka (babhrú brown) a certain
lizard. Bhāvatka your worship's has an anomalous initial vṛddhi.
d. Of words in which a diminutive meaning is more or less probable: açvaká nag, kanī́naka
and kumāraká boy, kanīnakā́ or kanī́nikā girl, pādaká little foot, putraká little son, rājaká
princeling, çakuntaká birdling. Sometimes a contemptuous meaning is conveyed by such a
diminutive: for formations with this value from pronominal stems, see above, 521; other
examples are anyaká (RV.), álakam (RV.: from álam), and even the verb-form yāmaki (for yāmi:
KB.).
e. The derivatives in ka with unchanged meaning are made from primitives of every variety
of form, simple and compound, and have the same variety of accent as the adjective derivatives
(with which they are at bottom identical). Thus:
f. From simple nouns and adjectives: ástaka home, nā́sikā nostril, mákṣikā fly, avikā́ ewe,
iṣukā́ arrow, dūraká distant, sarvaká all, dhénukā (dhenú) cow, nágnaka (nagná) naked,
báddhaka (baddhá) captive, abhinnataraka by no means different , anastamitaké before sun-

set, vamraká ant, arbhaká small, çiçuká young, aṇīyaska finer, ejatká trembling, abhimādyatká
intoxicated, patayiṣṇuká flying. Such derivatives in the later language are innumerable; from
almost any given noun or adjective may be made an equivalent, ending in ka or kā (according
to the gender).
g. From compound primitives: svalpaká very small, vímanyuka removing wrath, vikṣiṇatká
destroying, pravartamānaká moving forward, viksīṇaká destroyed.
h. In the Brāhmaṇas and later, ka is often added to a possessive adjective compound (1307),
sometimes redundantly, but usually in order to obtain a more manageable stem for inflection:
thus, anakṣíka eyeless, atvakká skinless, aretáska without seed, vyasthaka boneless, saçiraska
along with the head , ekagāyatrīka containing a single gāyatrī-verse, gṛhītávasatīvarīka one who
has taken yesterday's water, sapatnīka with his spouse , bahuhastíka having many elephants,
sadīkṣopasátka with dīkṣā and upasad, āhitasamitka with his fuel laid on , abhinavavayaska of
youthful age, an̄guṣṭhamātraka of thumb size.
i. The vowel by which the ka is preceded has often an irregular character; and especially, a
feminine in ikā is so common beside a masculine in aka as to be its regular correspondent (as
is the case with the so-called primary aka: above, 1181). In RV. are found beside one another
only iyattaká and iyattikā́; but AV. has several examples.
j. Two suffixes made up of ka and a preceding vowel — namely, aka and ika — are given
by the grammarians as independent secondary suffixes, requiring initial vṛddhi-strengthening of
the primitive. Both of them are doubtless originally made by addition of ka to a final i or a,
though coming to be used independently.
k. Of vṛddhi-derivatives in aka no examples have been noted from the older language (unless
māmaká mine is to be so regarded); and they are not common in the later: thus, āvaçyaka
necessary, vārddhaka old age, rāmaṇīyaka delightfulness.
l. Of vṛddhi-derivatives in ika, the Veda furnishes a very few cases: vā́santika vernal, vā́rṣika
of the rainy season , hāímantika wintry (none of them in RV.); AV. has kāirātikā́ of the Kirātas,
apparent fem. to a masc. kāirātaka, which is not found till later. Examples from a more recent
period (when they become abundant) are: vāidika relating to the Vedas, dhārmika religious,
āhnika daily, vāinayika well-behaved, dāuvārika doorkeeper, nāiyāyika versed in the Nyāya .
m. Before the suffix ka, some finals show a form which is characteristic of external rather
than internal combination. A final sonant mute, of course, becomes surd, and an aspirate loses
its aspiration (117 a, 114): cf. -upasatka, -samitka, above, h. So also a palatal becomes guttural
(as before t etc.: 217): e. g. -srukka, -rukka, -tvakka, anṛkka. A s remains after ā˘, and becomes
ṣ after an alterant vowel (180): e. g. sadyaska, jyotiṣka, dirghāyuṣka. But the other sibilants
take the form

they would have in composition: thus, adíkka (diç), ṣaṭka, -viṭka, -tviṭka (ṣaṣ etc.). Anāçīrka (TS.:
āçis) is anomalous; and so is parutka (Āpast.), if it comes from parus.
1223. Several suffixes, partly of rare occurrence and questionable character, contain a न् n
as consonantal element, and may be grouped together here.
a. A few derivatives in āna in RV. were given above (1175 a).
b. With ānī (which is perhaps the corresponding feminine) are made a small number of
words, chiefly wife-names: thus, indrāṇī́, varuṇānī́ (these, with uçīnárāṇī, purukútsānī, mudgā́lanī,
ūrjā́nī, are found in RV.), rudrāṇī, mātulānī maternal uncle's wife, çarvāṇī, bhavānī, içānānī,
çakrāṇī, upādhyāyānī, mṛḍānī, brahmāṇī; and yavānī.
c. The feminines in nī and knī from masculine stems in ta have been already noticed above
(1176 d). From páti master, husband the feminine is pátnī, both as independent word, spouse,
and as final of an adjective compound: thus, devápatnī having a god for husband, síndhupatnī
having the Indus as master . And the feminine of paruṣá rough is in the older language
sometimes páruṣṇī.
d. With īna are made a full series of adjective derivatives from the words with final añc
(407 ff.); they are accented usually upon the penult, but sometimes on the final; and the same
word has sometimes both accents: for example, apācī́na, nīcī́na, prācī́na, arvācī́na and arvācīná,
pratīcī́na and pratīcīná, samīcīná. Besides these, a number of other adjectives, earlier and later:
examples are saṁvatsarī́na yearly, prāvṛṣī́ṇa of the rainy season , viçvajanī́na of all people,
jñātakulī́na of known family, adhvanīna traveller (ádhvan way) , āçvīna day's journey on
horseback (áçva horse). RV. has once mā́kīna mine.
e. With ena is made sāmidhená (f. -nī́), from samídh, with initial strengthening.
f. As to a few words in ina, compare 1209 c.
g. The adjectives made with simple na fall partly under another head (below, 1245 f); here
may be noted çū́raṇa heroic (?), phálguna, çmaçruṇá, dadruṇa, and, with vṛddhi-strengthening,
strāíṇa woman's (its correlative, pāuṁsna, occurs late) and cyāutná inciting. If dróṇa comes
from dru wood, it has the anomaly of a guṇa-strengthening.
1224. Certain suffixes containing a म् m may be similarly grouped.
a. With ima are made a small number of adjectives from nouns in tra: thus, khanítrima
made by digging, kṛtríma artificial, dattrima, paktrima, pūtríma; in other finals, kuṭṭima, gaṇima,
talima, tulima, pākima, udgārima, vyāyogima, saṁvyūhima, nirvedhima, āsan̄gima, all late. In
agrima (RV.) foremost the ma has perhaps the ordinal value.
b. The uses of simple ma in forming superlatives (474) and ordinals (487 d, e) have been
already noticed, and the words thus made specified.

c. A few neuter abstracts end in mna: thus, dyumná brightness, nṛmṇá manliness; and, from
particles, nimná depth and sumná welfare. The suffix comes perhaps from man with an added
a.
d. For the words showing a final min, see below, 1231.
1225. मय maya. With this suffix are formed adjectives signifying made or composed or
consisting of, also abounding in, that which is denoted by the primitive.
a. The accent is always on the má, and the feminine is regularly and usually in máyī. In the
oldest language (V.), final as remains unchanged before the suffix: thus, manasmáya,
nabhasmáya, ayasmáya; but d is treated as in external combination: thus, mṛnmáya; and in the
Brāhmaṇas and later, finals in general have the latter treatment: e. g. tejomáya, adomáya,
āpomáya, jyotirmaya, yajurmáya, etanmáya, asṝn̄maya, vān̄máya, ammaya, prāvṛṇmaya. RV. has
açmanmáya (later açmamaya). In hiraṇmáya (B. and later) the primitive ( hiraṇya) is peculiarly
mutilated. RV. has sūmáya of good make, and kimmáya made of what?
b. A very few examples of a feminine in yā occur in the later language.
1226. र ra. A few derivative adjectives are made with this suffix. Accent and treatment of
the primitive are various.
a. With simple addition of ra are made, for example: pāṅsurá dusty, -çrīra (also -çlīla) in
açrīrá ugly, dhūmrá dusky (dhūmá smoke), madhura (late) sweet. In an example or two, there
appears to be accompanying initial strengthening: thus, ā́gnīdhra of the fire-kindler (agnī́dh),
çān̄kura stake-like (çan̄kú); and in çekhara (also çikhara), a guṇa-strengthening.
b. With an inorganic vowel before the ending are made, for example, médhira wise, rathirá
in a chariot; karmā́ra smith; dantura (late) tusked; acchéra (? MS.), çrāmaṇera, saṁgamanera.
c. The use of ra in forming a few words of comparative meaning was noticed above (474),
and the words so made were given.
1227. ल la. This and the preceding suffix are really but two forms of the same. In some
words they exchange with one another, and ल la is usually, but not always, the later form in
use.
a. Examples are: bahulá abundant, madhulá (later madhura) and madhūla sweet, bhīmala
fearful, jīvalá lively, açlīlá (and açrīrá) wretched; with ā, vācāla talkative (late); with i, phenila
foamy (late:

phéna); with u, vātula and vātūla windy (late: vā́ta); and mātula maternal uncle is a somewhat
irregular formation from mātṛ́ mother.
b. In the later language are found a few adjectives in lu, always preceded by ā; examples
are: kṛpālu and dayālu compassionate, īrṣyālu jealous, uṣṇālu heated, çayālu and svapnālu
sleepy, lajjālu modest, lālālu drooling, çraddhālu trusting, krodhālu passionate. One or two such
derivatives having a primary aspect were noticed at 1192 b.
1228. व va. A small number of adjectives have this ending (accented, added to an unaltered
primitive).
a. Examples are: arṇavá billowy, keçavá hairy; rāsnāvá girded; añjivá slippery, çantivá
tranquillizing, çraddhivá credible, amaṇiva jewelless, rājīva striped.
b. There are a very few adjectives in vala and vaya which may be noticed here: thus,
kṛṣīvalá peasant (kṛṣi ploughing) , ūrṇāvalá wooly, rajasvala, ūrjasvala, payasvala, çādvala,
naḍvala, çikhāvala, dantāvala; druváya wooden dish, caturvaya fourfold.
c. With vya are made two or three words from names of relationship: thus, pítṛvya paternal
uncle, bhrā́tṛvya nephew, enemy.
1229. श ça. A very few adjectives appear to be made by an added ending of this form.
a. Thus, romaçá or lomaçá hairy, étaça (also etaçá) variegated, arvaçá or árvaça hasting,
babhluçá or babhruçá and kapiça brownish, kṛṣṇaça blackish, yuvaçá youthful, bāliça childish,
karkaça harsh, karmaça (?) n. pr.; and giriça, vāriça (?), vṛkṣaça are doubtless of the same
character (not containing the root çī). The character of harīmaçá, káçmaça, kaláça  is doubtful.
b. Many of the adjective derivatives already treated have sometimes a possessive value, the
general meaning of being concerned with, having relation to  being specialized into that of being
in possession of. But there are also a few distinctively possessive suffixes; and some of these,
on account of the unlimited freedom of using them and the frequency of their occurrence, are
very conspicuous parts of the general system of derivation. These will be next considered.
1230. इन् in. Possessive adjectives of this ending may be formed almost unlimitedly from
stems in अ a or आ ā, and are sometimes (but very rarely) made from stems with other finals.
a. A final vowel disappears before the suffix. The accent is on the suffix. As to the inflection
of these adjectives, see above, 438 ff. They are to be counted by hundreds in the older
language, and are equally or more numerous in the later.

b. Examples from a-stems are: açvín possessing horses, dhanín wealthy, pakṣín winged,
balín strong, bhagín fortunate, vajrín wielding the thunderbolt, çikhaṇḍín crested, hastín
possessing hands, ṣoḍaçín of sixteen, gardabhanādín having an ass's voice, brahmavarcasín of
eminent sanctity, sādhudevín having luck at play, kūcidarthín having errands everywhither; —
from ā-stems, manīṣín wise, çikhín crested, ṛtāyín pious.
c. Derivatives from other stems are very few in comparison: thus, from i-stems, atithin (?),
abhimātín, arcín, açanin, ūrmin, kālanemin, khādín, -pāṇin, marīcin, mauñjin, māulin, -yonin,
venin, saṁdhin, samṛddhin, surabhin (of those found only at the end of a possessive compound
the character is doubtful, since case-forms of i- and in-stems are not seldom exchanged); from
u-stems, gurvin, çatagvín (?), veṇavin (with guna of the u); — from stems in an, varmín, karmin,
carmin, -chadmin, janmin, dhanvin, -dharmin, nāmin, brahmin, yakṣmin, çarmin, and çvanin; —
in as, retín rich in seed, and probably varcin n. pr.; also (perhaps through stems in - sa) çavasín
and sahasin, manasín, -vayasín; — isolated are parisrajín garlanded, and hiranín (hiránya).
d. It was pointed out above (1183) that derivatives in in have assumed on a large scale the
aspect and value of primary derivatives, with the significance of present participles, especially
at the end of compounds. The properly secondary character of the whole formation is shown, on
the one hand, by the frequent use in the same manner of words bearing an unmistakably
secondary form, as praçnín, garbhín, jūrṇín, dhūmín, snānin, homin, matsarín, paripanthín,
pravepanín, saṁgatin; and, on the other hand, by the occurrence of reverted palatals (216)
before the in, which could only be as in replaced a: thus, arkín, -bhan̄gín, -san̄gín, -rokín.
e. In a few cases, there appears before the in a y preceded by an ā of inorganic character:
thus, dhanvāyín, tantrāyín, çvetāyín, sṛkāyín, ātatāyín, pratihitāyín, marāyín, ṛtāyín, svadhāyín
(VS.: TB. -vín). The y in all such words is evidently the inserted y after ā (258 a), and to
assume for them a suffix yin is quite needless.
f. The accentuation pravrā́jin, prasyándin, in the concluding part of ÇB., is doubtless false;
and the same is to be suspected for çā́kī, sárī, írī (RV., each once).
g. A very few words in in have not suffered the possessive specialization. Such are vanín
tree, hermit, kapotín dovelike, aṇḍin scrotum-like (cf. 1233 f).
1231. िमन् min. With this suffix are made an extremely small number of possessive adjectives.
a. In the old language, the words in min have the aspect of derivatives in in from nouns in
ma, although in two or three cases — iṣmín

and ṛgmín in RV., vāgmín in ÇB. — no such nouns are found in actual use beside them. In the
later language, min is used as independent element in a very few words: thus, gomin
possessing cattle, svāmin (Sūtras and later) master, lord (sva own), kakudmin humped.
b. The two words ṛgmín and vāgmín show not only reversion but also sonantizing of an
original palatal.
1232. िवन् vin. The adjectives made with this suffix are also not numerous. They have the
same meanings with those in इन् in. The accent is on the suffix.
a. The RV. has ten adjectives in vin; they become rather more common later. Though for
them may be suspected a similar origin to those in yin and min (above), signs of it are much
less clearly traceable.
b. The great majority have vin added after as: e. g. namasvín reverential, tapasvín heated,
tejasvín brilliant, yaçasvín beautiful, and so retasvín, enasvín, harasvín, etc.; and çatasvín,
çrotrasvín, rūpasvin have an inserted s, by analogy with them. Most others have ā (sometimes,
by lengthening): thus, glāvín, medhāvín, māyāvín, sabhāvín, aṣṭrāvín obedient to the goad,
dvayāvín double-minded, ubhayāvín possessing of both kinds, dhanvāvin, tandrāvin, āmayāvín,
ātatāvín. More rarely, vin is added after another consonant than s: thus, vāgvín, dhṛṣadvín,
ātmanvín, kumudvin, sragvin, yajvin, ajvin. The doubtful word vyaçnuvín (VS., once: TB.
vyáçniya) appears to add the ending (or in, with euphonic v) to a present tense-stem.
c. An external form of combination is seen only in vāgvín and dhṛṣadvín (both Vedic), with
the common reversion of a palatal in sragvin.
1233. व् vant. Very numerous possessive adjectives are made by this suffix, from noun-
stems of every form, both in the earlier language and in the later.
a. The accent generally remains upon the primitive, without change; but an accent resting
on a stem-final, if this be anything but á or ā́, is in the majority of cases thrown forward upon
the suffix. As to inflection, formation of feminine, etc., see 452 ff.
b. A final vowel — oftenest a, very rarely u — is in many words lengthened in the older
language (247) before this ending, as in composition. Nouns in an more often retain the n.
c. Examples of the normal formation are: with unchanged accent, kéçavant hairy, putrávant
having a son, prajánanavant procreative, puṇḍárīkavant rich in lotuses, híraṇyavant rich in gold,
apūpávant having cakes, rājanyàvant allied with a kshatriya; prajā́vant having progeny, ū́rṇāvant
wooly, dákṣiṇāvant rich in sacrificial gifts; sákhivant having friends, saptarṣívant accompanied
by the seven sages; çácīvant powerful, táviṣīvant vehement, pátnīvant with spouse, dhī́vant
devoted,

dyā́vāpṛthivī́vant (94 b) with heaven and earth;  víṣṇuvant accompanied by Vishnu; háritvant
golden, āvṛ́tvant hither turned, āçī́rvant mixed with milk, svàrvant splendid, çarádvant full of
years, púṁsvant having a male, páyasvant rich, támasvant dark, bráhmaṇvant accompanied with
worship, rómaṇvant hairy 
(but 
also romavant, lómavant, vṛtrahavant, 
etc.), kakúbhvant
containing a kakúbh; — with accent on the suffix, agnivánt having fire, rayivánt wealthy, nṛvánt
manly, padvánt having feet, nasvánt with nose, āsanvánt having a mouth, çīrṣaṇvánt headed
(also çīrṣavant).
d. With final stem-vowel lengthened: for example, áçvāvant (beside áçvavant) possessing
horses, sutā́vant having soma expressed, vṛ́ṣṇyāvant of virile force  (about thirty such cases
occur in V.); çáktīvant mighty, svádhitīvant having axes, ghṛ́ṇīvant hot; viṣūvánt dividing (víṣu
apart).
e. Certain special irregularities are as follows: an inserted s in índrasvant, máhiṣvant;
inserted n in vánanvant, búdhanvant, vádhanvant, gartanvánt, māṅsanvánt; shortening of a final
of 
the 
primitive 
in māyávant, 
yājyàvant, 
puronuvākyàvant, 
āmíkṣavant, 
sarasvativant ;
abbreviation in hiraṇvant; inserted ā in çavasāvant, sahasāvant, and the odd mahimāvant;
anomalous accent in kṛçanā́vant (if from kṛ́çana pearl); derivation from particles in antárvant
pregnant, viṣūvánt (above, d).
f. Instead of the specialized meaning of possessing, the more general one of like to,
resembling is seen in a number of words, especially in the derivatives from pronominal stems,
mā́vant like me etc. (517: add ī́vant, kī́vant). Other examples are índrasvant like Indra, nīḍávant
nestlike, nī́lavant blackish, nṛvánt manly, pṛ́ṣadvant speckled, kṣāítavant princely; compare the
later paravant dependent. It was pointed out above (1107) that the adverb of comparison in vát
is the accusative neuter of a derivative of this class.
g. In a few words, vant has the aspect of forming primary derivatives: thus, vivásvant (or
vívasvant) shining, also n. pr., ánupadasvant, árvant, pípiṣvant (?), yahvánt.
h. For the derivatives in vat from prepositions, which appear to have nothing to do with this
suffix, see 1245 j.
i. While this suffix is generally added to a primitive according to the rules of internal
combination (see examples above, c), treatment also as in external combination begins already
in RV., in pṛ́ṣadvant (pṛ́ṣat), and becomes more common later: thus, tapovant, tejovant,
an̄girovant 
(beside tápasvant 
etc.); vidyúdvant 
(beside vidyutvant) , bṛhadvant, jagadvant,
sadvant, etc.; triṣṭubvant (against kakúbhvant), samidvant, vimṛdvant; vāgvant (against ṛkvant);
svarāḍvant; havyavāḍvant; āçīrvant.
j. None of the suffixes beginning with v show in the Veda resolution of v to u.

1234. वन् van. The secondary derivatives in this suffix belong to the older language, and are
a small number, of which extremely few have more than an occurrence or two.
a. They have the aspect of being produced under the joint influence of primary van and
secondary vant. A final short vowel is usually lengthened before the suffix. The accent is
various, but oftenest on the penult of the stem. The feminine (like that of the derivatives in
primary van: 1169 f) is in varī.
b. The Vedic examples are: from a-stems, ṛṇāván or ṛṇaván, ṛtā́van (and f. -varī) , ṛ́ghāvan,
dhitā́van, satyā́van, sumnāvarī, and maghávan; from ā-stems, sūnṛ́tāvarī, svadhā́van (and f. -varī);
from i-stems, amatīván, arātīván, çruṣṭīván, muṣīván, and kṛṣīvan (only in the further derivative
kā́rṣīvaṇa); dhī́van; from consonant-stems, átharvan, samádvan, sáhovan (bad AV. variant to RV.
sahā́van) ; hā́rdvan (TA. also hārdivan). Somewhat anomalous are sahā́van, índhanvan (for
índhanavan?), and sanítvan (for sánitivan?). The only words of more than sporadic occurrence
are ṛtā́van, maghávan, átharvan.
c. Sáhovan (see b) is the only example of external combination with this suffix.
1235. म् mant. This is a twin-suffix to व् vant (above, 1233); their derivatives have the
same value, and are to some extent exchangeable with one another. But possessives in म् mant
are much less frequent (in the older language, about a third as many), and are only very rarely
made from a-stems.
a. If the accent of the primitive word is on the final, it is in the great majority of instances
(three quarters) thrown forward upon the added suffix; otherwise, it maintains its place
unchanged. A final vowel before the suffix is in only a few cases made long. Examples are:
b. With the accent of the primitive unchanged: káṇvamant, yávamant rich in barley, and
vibhavamant n. pr. (these alone from a-stems, and the first only occurring once); ávimant
possessing sheep, açánimant bearing the thunderbolt, óṣadhīmant rich in herbs, vā́çīmant
carrying an axe, vásumant possessing good things, mádhumant rich in sweets, tváṣṭṛmant
accompanied by Tvashtar, hótṛmant provided with priests , ā́yuṣmant long-lived, jyótiṣmant full
of brightness; — ulkuṣī́mant accompanied with meteors, pīlúmant (?), prasū́mant having young
shoots, gómant rich in kine, garútmant winged, vihútmant with libation, kakúdmant humped,
vidyúnmant (with irregular assimilation of t: VS. has also kakúnmant) gleaming, virúkmant
shining, havíṣmant with libations, vipruṣmant with drops.

c. With the accent thrown forward upon the ending: asimánt with knives, agnimánt having
fire, iṣudhimánt with a quiver, paçumánt possessing cattle, vāyumánt with wind, pitṛmánt (AV.
pitṛ́mant) accompanied by the Fathers, mātṛmánt having a mother; no long final vowels are
found before the suffix in this division, and only once a consonant, in dasmát (RV., once).
d. Protraction of a final vowel is seen in tvíṣīmant, dhrájīmant, hírīmant; in jyótiṣīmant is
irregularly inserted an ī (after the analogy of táviṣīmant); in çuciṣmant, mahiṣmant, an s;
suṣumánt (RV., once) appears to be primary.
e. The adverb āçumát appears to be related to adverbs in vát as the suffix mant to vant.
f. By the side of derivatives made with internal combination appears vidyúnmant even in
RV.; and other like cases occur later: thus, parisrúnmant, kakunmant, kṣunmant, puronún̄mant,
vān̄mant, kakummant, gudaliṇmant, yaçomant.
1236. It has been seen above (especially in connection with the suffixes a and ya) that the
neuter of a derivative adjective is frequently used as an abstract noun. There are, however, two
suffixes which have in the later language the specific office of making abstract nouns from
adjectives and nouns; and these are found also, more sparingly used, in the oldest language,
each having there one or two other evidently related suffixes beside it.
a. For derivatives of the same value made with the suffix iman, see above, 1168 i–k.
1237. ता tā. With this suffix are made feminine abstract nouns, denoting the quality of being
so and so, from both adjectives and nouns.
a. The form of the primitive is unchanged, and the accent is uniformly on the syllable
preceding the suffix.
b. Examples (from the older language) are: devátā divinity, vīrátā manliness, puruṣátā
human nature, agnítā firehood, apaçútā cattle-lessness, bandhútā relationship, vasútā wealth;
nagnátā nakedness, suvīrátā wealth in retainers, anapatyátā lack of descendants, agótā poverty
in cattle, abrahmátā lack of devotion, aprajástā absence of progeny; also doubtless sūnṛ́tā (from
sūnára), although the word is a few times used as an adjective (like çaṁtāti and satyatāti: see
next paragraph).
c. Of special formation are mamátā selfishness, trétā triplicity, astitā actuality. RV. has
avī́ratā, with exceptional accent. In ekapatnitā is seen a shortened final vowel of the primitive.
Janátā has acquired a concrete meaning, people, folk; also grāmatā (once) villages collectively.
1238. ताित tāti, तात् tāt. These suffixes are Vedic only, and the latter is limited to RV. Their
relationship to the preceding is

evident, but opinions are at variance as to its nature. The accent is as in the derivatives with
tā.
a. The quotable examples in tāti are: ariṣṭátāti uninjuredness, ayakṣmátāti freedom from
disease, gṛbhītátāti the being seized, jyeṣṭhátāti supremacy, devátāti divinity, vasútāti wealth,
çáṁtāti good-fortune, sarvátāti completeness; and, with exceptional accent, ástatāti home, and
dákṣatāti cleverness; çivatāti and çubhatāti occur (once each) in the later language. Two words
in tāti are used adjectively (inorganically, by apposition?): çáṁtāti (RV., twice; and AV. xix. 44.
1, in manuscripts), and satyatāti (RV., once: voc.).
b. The words in tāt (apparently made by abbreviation from tāti) occur in only one or two
cases-forms; they were all mentioned above (383 k. 2).
1239.  tva. With this suffix are made neuter nouns, of the same value as the feminines in
ता tā (above, 1237).
a. The neuter abstracts in tva are in the older language considerably more common than
the feminines in tā, although themselves also not very numerous. The accent is without
exception on the suffix.
b. Examples (from the older language) are: amṛtatvá immortality, devatvá divinity,
subhagatvá good-fortune, ahamuttaratvá struggle for precedency, çucitvá purity, patitvá
husbandship, taraṇitvá energy, dīrghāyutvá long life, çatrutvá enmity, bhrātṛtvá brotherhood,
vṛṣatvá virility, sātmatvá soulfulness, maghavattvá liberality, rakṣastvá sorcery. In anāgāstvá and
-prajāstvá there is a lengthening of the final syllable of the primitive; and in sāuprajāstvá (AV.,
once) this appears to be accompanied by initial vṛddhi (sāubhagatvá is doubtless from
sāúbhaga, not subhága); and in these and pratyanastvá there is an apparent insertion of s. In
sadhanitvá (RV.), vasatīvaritvá (TS.), rohiṇitvá (TB.), there is shortening of final feminine ī
before the suffix. Of peculiar formation are astitva actuality and sahatva union. The apparent
feminine datives yūthatvāyāi and gaṇatvāyāi (KS.) are doubtless false forms.
c. Besides the usual guttural reversions in samyaktva, sayuktva, we have external
combination in samittva (-idh-) and pūrvavāṭtva (-vah-).
d. In iṣitatvátā (RV., once) incitedness, and puruṣatvátā (RV., twice) human quality, appears
to be a combination of the two equivalent suffixes tva and tā.
e. The v of tva is to be read in Veda as u only once ( rakṣastuá).
1240. न tvana. The derivatives made with this suffix are, like those in tva, neuter abstracts.
They occur almost only in RV., and, except in a single instance (martyatvaná), have beside them
equivalent derivatives in tva. The accent is on the final, and the tva is never resolved into tua.

a. The words are: kavitvaná, janitvaná, patitvaná (also JB.), martyatvaná, mahitvaná, vasutvaná,
vṛṣatvaná, sakhitvaná.
1241. A few suffixes make no change in the character as part of speech of the primitive to
which they are added, but either are merely formal appendages, leaving the value of the word
what it was before, or make a change of degree, or introduce some other modification of
meaning.
1242. The suffixes of comparison and ordinal suffixes have for the most part been treated
already, and need only a reference here.
a. तर tara and तम tama are the usual secondary suffixes of adjective comparison: respecting
their use as such, see above, 471–473; respecting the use of tama as ordinal etc. suffix, see
487–8; respecting that of their accusatives as adverbial suffixes to prepositions etc., see 1111 e.
b. In vṛtratára and purutáma (RV.) the, accent is anomalous; in mṛdayáttama, it is drawn
forward to the final of the participle, as often in composition (1309); çaçvattamá (RV.) has the
ordinal accent; saṁvatsaratamá (ÇB.) is an ordinal; dívātara (RV., once: an error?) is an
ordinary adjective, of the day; surabhíṣṭama and tuvíṣṭama insert a s; kārotará and kāulitará
are probably vṛddhi-derivatives in a. In vatsatará (f. -rī́) weanling, açvatará mule, and dhenuṣṭarī́
cow losing her milk, the application of the suffix is peculiar and obscure; so also in rathaṁtará,
name of a certain sāman.
c. र ra and म ma, like tara and tama, have a comparative and superlative value; and the
latter of them forms ordinals: see above, 474, 487.
d. थ tha, like tama and ma, forms ordinals from a few numerals: see 487 c; also (with fem.
in -thī́) from tati, kati, yati, iti: thus, tatithá so-many-eth etc.
e. Apparently by false analogy with tatithá etc. (above, d), the quasi-ordinals tāvatitha,
yāvatitha, bahutitha are made, as if with a suffix titha (also katititha, late, for katithá); and, it
is said, from other words meaning a number or collection, as gaṇa, pūga, saṁgha; but none
such are quotable.
1243. Of diminutive suffixes there are none in Sanskrit with clearly developed meaning and
use. The occasional employment of ka, in a somewhat indistinct way, to make diminutives, has
been noticed above (1222).
1244. Of the ordinary adjective-making suffixes, given above, some occasionally make
adjectives from adjectives, with slight or imperceptible modification of value. The only one used
to any considerable extent in this way is ka: as to which, see 1222.

1245. A few suffixes are used to make derivatives from certain limited and special classes of
words, as numerals and particles. Thus:
a. तय taya makes a few adjectives, meaning of so many divisions  or kinds (used in the
neuter as collectives), from numerals: thus, ékataya (MS.), dvitaya, tritaya, cátuṣṭaya (AV.),
ṣaṭtaya (KB.: with external combination), saptátaya 
(ÇB.), aṣṭātaya 
(AB.), dáçataya (RV.),
bahútaya (TS.). Their fem. is in - yī.
b.  tya makes a class of adjectives from particles: e. g. nítya own, níṣṭya foreign, amā́tya
companion, etc. As the examples show, the accent of the primitive is retained. The fem. is in
-tyā.
c. The other quotable examples are ápatya, āvíṣṭya, sánutya, antastya, anyatastya-, tatastya,
kutastya, atratya, tatratya, yatratya, kutratya, ihatya, upatya, adhitya, prātastya, dakṣiṇātya
(instead of which, the regular form, is generally found dākṣiṇātya, apparently a further vṛddhi-
derivative from it: as if belonging to the southerners), and pāçcāttya and pāurastya (of a similar
character: these three last are said by the grammarians to be accented on the final, as is
proper for vṛddhi-derivatives); aptyá and āptyá perhaps contain the same suffix. In antastya and
prātastya is seen external combination.
d. The y of tya is in RV. always to be read as i after a heavy syllable.
e. त ta forms ekatá, dvitá, and tritá, also muhūrtá moment, and apparently avatá well (for
water).
f. With न na are made purāṇá ancient, víṣuṇa various, and perhaps samāná like.
g. With तन tana or (in a few cases)  tna are made adjectives from adverbs, nearly always
of time: e. g. pratná ancient, nū́tana or nū́tna present, sanātána or sanátna lasting, divātana of
the day, çvástana of tomorrow, hyastana of yesterday. The accent is various. The feminine is in
nī́.
h. The other quotable examples are: agretana, adyatana, adhunātána, idaṁtana, idānīṁtana,
etarhitana, ciraṁtana, tadānīṁtana, doṣātana, purātana, prāktana, prātastána, sadātana,
sāyaṁtána; from adverbs of place, adhastana, arvāktana, uparitana, kutastana ; — with tna,
parastāttna, purastāttna. A further vṛddhi-derivative, with equivalent meaning, nāutana (cf.
above, c), occurs late. In PB. is once found tvattana belonging to thee.
i. Besides the obvious cases of an assimilated final m before this suffix, we have external
combination in prātastána.
j. वत् vat makes from particles of direction the feminine nouns mentioned above (383 k. 1).
k. कट kaṭa, properly a noun in composition, is reckoned by the

grammarians as a suffix, in utkaṭa, nikaṭa, prakaṭa, vikaṭa (RV., once, voc.), and saṁkaṭa (all
said to be accented on the final).
l. A suffix vana is perhaps to be seen in nivaná, pravaṇa; — and āla in antarāla.
m. Occasional derivatives made with the ordinary suffixes of primary and secondary
derivation from numerals and particles have been noted above: thus, see ana (1150 n), ti (1157
h), ant (1172 a), u (1178 i), a (1209 i), ka (1222 c), mna (1224 c), maya (1225 a), vant (1233
e).
CHAPTER XVIII.
FORMATION OF COMPOUND STEMS.
1246. The frequent combination of declinable stems with one another to form compounds
which then are treated as if simple, in respect to accent, inflection, and construction, is a
conspicuous feature of the language, from its earliest period.
a. There is, however, a marked difference between the earlier and the later language as
regards the length and intricacy of the combinations allowed. In Veda and Brāhmaṇa, it is quite
rare that more than two stems are compounded together — except that to some much used
and familiar compound, as to an integral word, a further element is sometimes added. But the
later the period, and, especially, the more elaborate the style, the more a cumbrous and
difficult aggregate of elements, abnegating the advantages of an inflective language, takes the
place of the due syntactical union of formed words into sentences.
1247. Sanskrit compounds fall into three principal classes:
I. a. Copulative or aggregative compounds, of which the members are syntactically
coördinate: a joining together into one of words which in an uncompounded condition would be
connected by the conjunction and (rarely or).

b. Examples are: índrāváruṇāu Indra and Varuna, satyānṛté truth and falsehood, kṛtākṛtám
done and undone, devagandharvamānuṣoragarakṣasās gods and Gandharvas and men and
serpents and demons.
c. The members of such a compound may obviously be of any number, two or more than
two. No compound of any other class can contain more than two members — of which,
however, either or both may be compound, or decompound (below, 1248).
II. d. Determinative compounds, of which the former member is syntactically dependent on
the latter, as its determining or qualifying adjunct: being either, 1. a noun (or pronoun) limiting
it in a case-relation, or, 2. an adjective or adverb describing it. And, according as it is the one
or the other, are to be distinguished the two sub-classes: A. Dependent compounds; and B.
Descriptive compounds. Their difference is not an absolute one.
e. Examples are: of dependent compounds, amitrasenā́ army of enemies, pādodaka water for
the feet, āyurdā́ life-giving, hástakṛta made with the hands; of descriptive compounds, maharṣí
great sage, priyasakhi dear friend, amítra enemy, súkṛta well done.
f. These two classes are of primary value; they have undergone no unifying modification in
the process of composition; their character as parts of speech is determined by their final
member, and they are capable of being resolved into equivalent phrases by giving the proper
independent form and formal means of connection to each member. That is not the case with
the remaining class, which accordingly is more fundamentally distinct from them than they are
from one another.
III. g. Secondary adjective compounds, the value of which is not given by a simple
resolution into their component parts, but which, though having as final member a noun, are
themselves adjectives. These, again, are of two sub-classes: A. Possessive compounds, which are
noun-compounds of the preceding class, with the idea of possessing added, turning them from
nouns into adjectives; B. Compounds in which the second member is a noun syntactically
dependent on the first: namely, 1. Prepositional compounds, of a governing preposition and
following noun;

2. Participial compounds (only Vedic), of a present participle and its following object.
h. The sub-class B. is comparatively small, and its second division (participial compounds) is
hardly met with even in the later Vedic.
i. Examples are: vīrasena possessing a hero-army, prajākāma having desire of progeny,
tigmáçṛn̄ga sharphorned, háritasraj wearing green garlands; atimātrá excessive; yāvayáddveṣas
driving away enemies.
j. The adjective compounds are, like simple adjectives, liable to be used, especially in the
neuter, as abstract and collective nouns, and in the accusative as adverbs; and out of these
uses have grown apparent special classes of compounds, reckoned and named as such by the
Hindu grammarians. The relation of the classification given above to that presented in the
native grammar, and widely adopted from the latter by the European grammars, will be made
clear as we go on to treat the classes in detail.
1248. A compound may, like a simple word, become a member in another compound, and
this in yet another — and so on, without definite limit. The analysis of any compound, of
whatever length (unless it be a copulative), must be made by a succession of bisections.
a. Thus, the dependent compound pūrvajanmakṛta done in a previous existence  is first
divisible into kṛta and the descriptive pūrvajanman, then this into its elements; the dependent
sakalanītiçāstratattvajña knowing the essence of all books of behavior  has first the root-stem jña
(for √jñā) knowing separated from the rest, which is again dependent; then this is divided into
tattva essence and the remainder, which is descriptive; this, again, divides into sakala all and
nītiçāstra books of behavior, of which the latter is a dependent compound and the former a
possessive (sa and kalā having its parts together).
1249. a. The final of a stem is combined with the initial of another stem in composition
according to the general rules for external combination: they have been given, with their
exceptions, in chap. III., above.
b. If a stem has a distinction of strong and weak forms, it regularly enters into composition
as prior member in its weak form; or, if it has a triple distinction (311), in its middle form.

c. That is, especially, stems in ṛ or ar, at or ant, ac or añc, etc., show in composition the
forms in ṛ, at, ac, etc.; while those in an and in usually (exceptions sometimes occur, as
vṛṣaṇaçvá, vṛṣaṇvasú) lose their final n, and are combined as if a and i were their proper finals.
d. As in secondary derivation (1203 d), so also as prior member of a compound, a stem
sometimes shortens its final long vowel (usually ī, rarely ā): thus, in V., rodasiprā́, pṛthiviṣṭhā́,
pṛthiviṣád, dhā́rapūta, dhāravāká; in B., pṛthivi-dā, -bhāga, -loká, sarasvatikṛta, senānigrāmaṇyāù;
in S., garbhiniprāyaçcitta, sāmidheniprāiṣtya, vasatīvaripariharaṇa, ekādaçinilin̄ga, prapharvidā,
devatalakṣaṇa, 
devatapradhānatva; 
later, devakinandana, 
lakṣmivardhana, 
kumāridatta,
muhūrtaja, iṣṭakacita, etc.
e. Occasionally, a stem is used as prior member of a compound which does not appear, or
not in that form, as an independent word: examples are mahā great (apparently used
independently in V. in accusative), tuvi mighty (V.), dvi two.
f. Not infrequently, the final member of a compound assumes a special form: see below,
1315.
1250. But a case-form in the prior member of a compound is by no means rare, from the
earliest period of the language. Thus:
a. Quite often, an accusative, especially before a root-stem, or a derivative in a of equivalent
meaning: for example, pataṁgá going by flight, dhanaṁjayá winning wealth, abhayaṁkará
causing absence of danger, puṣṭimbhará bringing prosperity, vācamīn̄khayá inciting the voice;
but also sometimes before words of other form, as áçvamiṣṭi horse-desiring, çubhaṁyā́van going
in splendor, subhāgaṁkáraṇa making happy, bhayaṁkartṛ causer of fear. In a few cases, by
analogy with these, a word receives an accusative form to which it has no right: thus,
hṛdaṁsáni, makṣúṁgama, vasuṁdhara, ātmambhari.
b. Much more rarely, an instrumental: for example, girāvṛ́dh increasing by praise, vācā́stena
stealing by incantation, krátvāmagha gladly bestowing, bhāsā́ketu bright with light , vidmanā́pas
active with wisdom.
C. In a very few instances, a dative: thus, nareṣṭhā́ serving a man, asméhiti errand to us,
and perhaps kiyedhā́ and mahevṛ́dh.
d. Not seldom, a locative; and this also especially with a root-stem or a-derivative: for
example, agregá going at the head, divikṣít dwelling in the sky, vaneṣáh prevailing in the wood ,
an̄geṣṭhā́ existing in the limbs, proṣṭheçayá lying on a couch , sutékara active with the soma,
divícara moving in the sky; āréçatru having enemies far removed, sumnáāpi near in favor,
máderaghu hasting in excitement, yudhiṣṭhira firm in battle, antevāsin dwelling near; apsujá
born in the waters, hṛtsvás hurling at hearts.
e. Least often, a genitive: thus, rāyáskāma desirous of wealth,

akasyavíd knowing no one. But the older language has a few examples of the putting together
of a genitive with its governing noun, each member of the combination keeping its own accent:
see below, 1267 d.
f. Ablative forms are to be seen in balātkāra violence and balātkṛta, and perhaps in
parātpriya. And a stem in ṛ sometimes appears in a copulative compound in its nominative form:
thus, pitāputrāu father and son, hotāpotārāu the invoker and purifier . Anyonya one another is a
fused phrase, of nominative and oblique case.
g. In a very few words, plural meaning is signified by plural form: thus, apsujā́ etc. (in
derivation, also, apsu is used as a stem), hṛtsvás, nṝ́ṅḥpraṇetra conducting men, rujaskara
causing pains, (and dual) hanūkampa trembling of the two jaws .
h. Much more often, of words having gender-forms, the feminine is used in composition,
when the distinctive feminine sense is to be conveyed: e. g. gopīnātha master of the
shepherdesses, dāsīputra son of a female slave, mṛgīdṛç gaselle-eyed, praṇītāpraṇáyana vessel
for consecrated water.
1251. The accent of compounds is very various, and liable to considerable irregularity even
within the limits of the same formation; and it must be left to be pointed out in detail below.
All possible varieties are found to occur. Thus:
a. Each member of the compound retains its own separate accent. This is the most
anomalous and infrequent method. It appears in certain Vedic copulative compounds chiefly
composed of the names of divinities (so-called devatā-dvandvas: 1255 ff.), and in a small number
of aggregations partly containing a genitive case-form as prior member (1267 d).
b. The accent of the compound is that of its prior member. This is especially the case in the
great class of possessive compounds; but also in determinatives having the participle in ta or
na as final member, in those beginning with the negative a or an, and in other less numerous
and important classes.
c. The accent of the compound is that of the final member. This is not on so large a scale
the case as the preceding; but it is nevertheless quite common, being found in many
compounds having a verbal noun or adjective as final member, in compounds beginning with
the numerals dvi and tri or the prefixes su and dus, and elsewhere in not infrequent
exceptions.
d. The compound takes an accent of its own, independent of that of either of its
constituents, on its final syllable (not always, of course, to be distinguished from the preceding
case). This method is largely followed: especially, by the regular copulatives, and by the great
mass of dependent and descriptive noun-compounds, by most possessives beginning with the
negative prefix; and by others.
e. The compound has an accent which is altered from that of one of its members. This is
everywhere an exceptional and sporadically occurring

case, and the instances of it, noted below under each formation, do not require to be assembled
here. Examples are: medhásāti (médha) , tilámiçra (tíla) , khā́dihasta (khādí) , yāvayáddveṣas
(yāváyant); çakadhū́ma (dhūmá), amṛ́ta (mṛtá), suvī́ra (vīrá), tuvigrī́va (grīvā́). A few words — as
víçva, pū́rva, and sometimes sárva — take usually a changed accent as prior members of
compounds.
I. Copulative Compounds.
1252. Two or more nouns — much less often adjectives, and, in an instance or two, adverbs
— having a coördinate construction, as if connected by a conjunction, usually and, are
sometimes combined into compounds.
a. This is the class to which the Hindu grammarians give the name of dvandva pair, couple;
a dvandva of adjectives, however, is not recognized by them.
b. Compounds in which the relation of the two members is alternative instead of copulative,
though only exceptional, are not very rare: examples are nyūnādhika defective or redundant,
jayaparājaya victory or defeat, krītotpanna purchased or on hand , kāṣṭhaloṣṭasama like a log or
clod, pakṣimṛgatā the condition of being bird or beast , triṅçadviṅça numbering twenty or thirty,
catuṣpan̄cakṛtvas four or five times, dvyekāntara different by one or two. A less marked
modification of the copulative idea is seen in such instances as priyasatya agreeable though
true, prārthitadurlabha sought after but hard to obtain; or in çrāntāgata arrived weary.
1253. The noun-copulatives fall, as regards their inflective form, into two classes:
1. a. The compound has the gender and declension of its final member, and is in number a
dual or a plural, according to its logical value, as denoting two or more than two individual
things.
b. Examples are: prāṇāpānāú inspiration and expiration, vrīhiyavāú rice and barley, ṛksāmé
verse and chant, kapotolukāú dove and owl, candrādityāu moon and sun, hastyaçvāu the
elephant and horse, ajāváyas goats and sheep, devāsurā́s the gods and demons, atharvān̄girásas
the Atharvans and Angirases , sambādhatandryàs anxieties and fatigues, vidyākarmáṇī knowledge
and action, hastyaçvās elephants and horses; of more than two members (no examples quotable
from the older language), çayyāsanabhogās lying, sitting, and eating, brāhmaṇakṣatriyaviṭçūdrās
a Brahman, Kshatriya, Vaiçya, and Çūdra ,

rogaçokaparītāpabandhanavyasanāni disease, pain, grief, captivity, and misfortune.
2. c. The compound, without regard to the number denoted, or to the gender of its
constituents, becomes a neuter singular collective.
d. Examples are: iṣṭāpūrtám what is offered and bestowed, ahorātrám a day and night,
kṛtākṛtám the done and undone, bhūtabhavyám past and future, keçaçmaçrú hair and beard,
oṣadhivanaspatí plants and trees, candratārakám moon and stars, ahinakulam snake and
ichneumon, çirogrīvam head and neck, yūkāmakṣīkamatkuṇam lice, flies, and bugs.
1254. a. That a stem in ṛ as prior member sometimes takes its nominative form, in ā, was
noticed above, 1250 f.
b. A stem as final member is sometimes changed to an a-form to make a neuter collective:
thus, chattropānaham an umbrella and a shoe.
c. The grammarians give rules as to the order of the elements composing a copulative
compound: thus, that a more important, a briefer, a vowel-initial member should stand first; and
that one ending in a should be placed last. Violations of them all, however, are not infrequent.
1255. In the oldest language (RV.), copulative compounds such as appear later are quite
rare, the class being chiefly represented by dual combinations of the names of divinities and
other personages, and of personified natural objects.
a. In these combinations, each name has regularly and usually the dual form, and its own
accent; but, in the very rare instances (only three occurrences out of more than three hundred)
in which other cases than the nom.-acc.-voc. are formed, the final member only is inflected.
b. 
Examples 
are: índrāsómā, 
índrāvíṣṇū, 
índrābṛ́haspátī, 
agnī́ṣómāu, 
turváçāyádū,
dyā́vāpṛthivī́, uṣā́sānáktā (and, with intervening words, náktā...uṣā́sā), sū́ryāmā́sā. The only plural
i s indrāmarutas (voc.). The cases of other than nominative form are mitrā́váruṇābhyām and
mitrā́váruṇayos (also mitráyor váruṇayoḥ), and índrāváruṇayos (each once only).
c. From dyā́vapṛthivī́ is made the very peculiar genitive diváspṛthivyós (4 times: AV. has
dyā́vāpṛthivī́bhyām and dyā́vāpṛthivyós).
d. In one compound, parjányavā́tā, the first member (RV., once) does not have the dual
ending along with the double accent (indranāsatyā, voc., is doubtful as to accent). In several,
the double accent is wanting, while yet the double designation of number is present: thus,
indrāpūṣṇós 
(beside índrāpūṣáṇā) , somāpūṣábhyām (somāpūṣaṇā 
occurs 
only 
as 
voc.),
vātāparjanyā́, sūryācandramásā, and indrāgnī́ (with indrāgníbhyām and indrāgnyós): somārudrāú
is accented only

in ÇB. And in one, indravāyū́, form and accent are both accordant with the usages of the later
language.
e. Of other copulatives, like those made later, the RV. has the plural ajāváyas, the duals
ṛksāmé, satyānṛté, sāçanānaçané; also the neuter collective iṣṭāpūrtám, and the substantively
used neuter of a copulative adjective, nīlalohitám. Further, the neuter plurals ahorātrā́ṇi
nycthemera, and ukthārkā́ praises and songs, of which the final members as independent words
are not neuter. No one of these words has more than a single occurrence.
1256. In the later Vedic (AV.), the usage is much more nearly accordant with that of the
classical language, save that the class of neuter singular collectives is almost wanting.
a. The words with double dual form are only a small minority (a quarter, instead of three
quarters, as in RV.); and half of them have only a single accent, on the final: thus, besides
those in RV., bhavārudrāú, bhavāçarvāú; agnāviṣṇū, voc., is of anomalous form. The whole
number of copulatives is more than double that in RV.
b. The only proper neuter collectives, composed of two nouns, are keçaçmaçrú hair and
heard, āñjanābhyañjanám salve and ointment, and kaçipūpabarhaṇám mat and pillow, unified
because of the virtual unity of the two objects specified. Neuter singulars, used in a similar
collective way, of adjective compounds, are (besides those in RV.): kṛtākṛtám what is done and
undone (instead of what is done and what is undone ) , cittākūtám thought and desire,
bhadrapāpám good and evil, bhūtabhavyám past and future.
1257. Copulative compounds composed of adjectives which retain their adjective character
are made in the same manner, but are in comparison rare.
a. 
Examples 
are çuklakṛṣṇa light and dark, sthalajāudaka terrestrial and aquatic,
dāntarājatasāuvarṇa of ivory and silver and gold , used distributively; and vṛttapīna round and
plump, çāntānukūla tranquil and propitious, hṛṣitasragrajohīna wearing fresh garlands and free
from dust, niṣekādiçmaçānānta beginning with conception and ending with burial , used
cumulatively; nā ’tiçītoṣṇa not over cold or hot, used alternatively; kṣaṇadṛṣṭanaṣṭa seen for a
moment and then lost, cintitopasthita at hand as soon as thought of , in more pregnant sense.
b. In the Veda, the only examples noted are the cumulative nīlalohitá and iṣṭāpūrtá etc.,
used in the neut. sing. as collectives (as pointed out above), with tāmradhūmrá dark tawny; and
the distributive dakṣiṇasavyá right and left, saptamāṣṭamá seventh and eighth, and bhadrapāpá
good and bad (beside the corresponding neut. collective). Such combinations as satyānṛté truth
and falsehood, priyāpriyā́ṇi things

agreeable and disagreeable, where each component is used substantively, are, of course, not to
be separated from the ordinary noun-compounds.
c. A special case is that of the compound adjectives of direction: as uttarapūrva north-east,
prāgdakṣiṇa south-east', dakṣiṇapaçcima south-west, etc.: compare 1291 b.
1258. In accentuated texts, the copulative compounds have uniformly the accent (acute) on
the final of the stem.
a. Exceptions are a case or two in AV., where doubtless the reading is false: thus,
vātāparjanyā̀ (once: beside -nyáyos) , devamanuṣyā̀ s (once: ÇB. -syá) , brahmarājanyā̀ bhyām
(also VS.); further, vākopavākyà (ÇB.), açanāyā́pipāse (ÇB.).
1259. An example or two are met with of adverbial copulatives: thus, áhardivi day by day,
sāyámprātar at evening and in the morning . They have the accent of their prior member. Later
occur also bāhyantar, pratyagdakṣiṇā, pratyagudak.
1260. Repeated words. In all ages of the language, nouns and pronouns and adjectives and
particles are not infrequently repeated, to give an intensive, or a distributive, or a repetitional
meaning.
a. Though these are not properly copulative compounds, there is no better connection in
which to notice them than here. They are, as the older language shows, a sort of compound, of
which the prior member has its own independent accent, and the other is without accent:
hence they are most suitably and properly written (as in the Vedic pada-texts) as compounds.
Thus: jahy èṣaṁ váraṁ-varam slay of them each beat man;  divé-dive or dyávi-dyavi from day to
day; án̄gād-an̄gāl lómno-lomnaḥ párvaṇi-parvaṇi from every limb, from every hair, in each joint;
prá-pra yajñápatiṁ tira make the master of the sacrifice live on and on;  bhū́yo-bhūyaḥ çváḥ-çvaḥ
further and further, tomorrow and again tomorrow;  ékayāi-’kayā with in each case one;  vayáṁ-
vayam our very selves.
b. Exceptional and rare cases are those of a personal verb-form repeated: thus, píbā-piba
(RV.), yájasva-yajasva (ÇB.), véda-veda (? ÇB.); — and of two words repeated: thus, yā́vad vā-
yāvad vā (ÇB.), yatamé vā-yatame vā (ÇB.).
c. In a few instances, a word is found used twice in succession without that loss of accent
the second time which makes the repetition a virtual composite: thus, nū́ nú (RV.), sáṁ sám
(AV.), ihé ’há (AV.), anáyā- ’náyā (ÇB.), stuhí stuhí (RV., acc. to pada-text).
d. The class of combinations here described is called by the native grammarians āmreḍita
added unto (?).
1261. Finally may be noticed in passing the compound numerals, ékādaça 11, dvā́viṅçati 22,
tríçata 103, cátuḥsahasra 1004, and so on (476 ff.), as a special and primitive class of
copulatives. They are accented on the prior member.

II. Determinative Compounds.
1262. A noun or adjective is often combined into a compound with a preceding determining
or qualifying word — a noun, or adjective, or adverb. Such a compound is conveniently called
determinative.
1263. This is the class of compounds which is of most general and frequent occurrence in
all branches of Indo-European language. Its two principal divisions have been already pointed
out: thus, A. Dependent compounds, in which the prior member is a substantive word (noun or
pronoun or substantively used adjective), standing to the other member in the relation of a case
dependent on it; and B. Descriptive compounds, in which the prior member is an adjective, or
other word having the value of an adjective, qualifying a noun; or else an adverb or its
equivalent, qualifying an adjective. Each of these divisions then falls into two sub-divisions,
according as the final member, and therefore the whole compound, is a noun or an adjective.
a. The whole class of determinatives is called by the Hindu grammarians tatpuruṣa (the
term is a specimen of the class, meaning his man); and the second division, the descriptives,
has the special name of karmadhāraya (of obscure application: the literal sense is something
like office-bearing). After their example, the two divisions are in European usage widely known
by these two names respectively.
A. Dependent Compounds.
1264. Dependent Noun-compounds. In this division, the case-relation of the prior member to
the other may be of any kind; but, in accordance with the usual relations of one noun to
another, it is oftenest genitive, and least often accusative.
a. Examples are: of genitive relation, devasenā́ army of gods, yamadūtá Yama's messenger,
jīvaloká the world of the living , indra-

dhanús Indra's bow, brahmagavī́ the Brahman's cow, viṣagirí poison-mount, mitralābha
acquisition of friends, mūrkhaçatāni hundreds of fools, vīrasenasuta Vī́rasena's son, rājendra
chief of kings, asmatputrās our sons, tadvacas his words; — of dative, pādodaka water for the
feet, māsanicaya accumulation for a month; — of instrumental, ātmasādṛçya likeness with self ,
dhānyārtha wealth acquired by grain, dharmapatnī lawful spouse, pitṛbandhú paternal relation;
— of ablative, apsaraḥsambhava descent from a nymph, madviyoga separation from me,
cāurabhaya fear of a thief; — of locative, jalakrīḍā sport in the water , grāmavāsa abode in the
village, puruṣānṛta untruth about a man; — of accusative, nagaragamana going to the city .
1265. Dependent Adjective-compounds. In this division, only a very small proportion of the
compounds have an ordinary adjective as final member; but usually a participle, or a derivative
of agency with the value of a participle. The prior member stands in any case-relation which is
possible in the independent construction of such words.
a. Examples are: of locative relation, sthālīpakva cooked in a pot , açvakovida knowing in
horses, vayaḥsama alike in age, yudhiṣṭhira steadfast in battle, tanū́çubhra beautiful in body; —
of instrumental, mātṛsadṛça like his mother; — of dative, gohita good for cattle; — of ablative,
bhavadanya other than you, garbhāṣṭama eighth from birth, dṛçyetara other than visible (i. e.
invisible); — of genitive, bharataçreṣṭha best of the Bharatas , dvijottama foremost of Brahmans;
— with participial words, in accusative relation, vedavíd Veda-knowing, annādá food-eating,
tanūpā́na body-protecting, satyavādín truth-speaking, pattragata committed to paper (lit. gone to
a leaf); — in instrumental, madhupū́ cleaning with honey, svayáṁkṛta self-made, índragupta
protected by Indra, vidyāhīna deserted by (i. e. destitute of) knowledge; — in locative,
hṛdayāvídh pierced in the heart , ṛtvíj sacrificing in due season , divícara moving in the sky; — in
ablative, rājyabhraṣṭa fallen from the kingdom , vṛkabhīta afraid of a wolf; — in dative,
çaraṇāgata come for refuge.
1266. We take up now some of the principal groups of compounds falling under these two
heads, in order to notice their specialities of formation and use, their relative frequency, their
accentuation, and so on.
1267. Compounds having as final member ordinary nouns (such, namely, as do not distinctly
exhibit the character of verbal nouns, of action or agency) are quite common. They are
regularly and usually accented on the final syllable, without reference to the accent of either
constituent. Examples were given above (1264 a).

a. A principal exception with regard to accent is páti master, lord (and its feminine pátnī),
compounds with which usually retain the accent of the prior member: thus, prajā́pati, vásupati,
átithipati, gópati, gṛhápatnī, etc. etc. (compare the verbal nouns in ti, below, 1274). But in a
few words páti retains its own accent: thus, viçpáti, rayipáti, paçupáti, vasupátnī, etc.; and the
more general rule is followed in apsarāpatí and vrājapatí (AV.), and nadīpatí (VS.), citpatí (MS.;
elsewhere citpáti).
b. Other exceptions are sporadic only: for example, janarā́jan, devavárman, hiraṇyatéjas,
pṛtanāháva, godhū́ma and çakadhū́ma (but dhūmá); vācā́stena.
c. The appearance of a case-form in such compounds is rare: examples are dívodasa,
vācā́stena, uccāíḥçravas, uccāírghoṣa, dūrébhās (the three last in possessive application).
d. A number of compounds are accented on both members: thus, çácīpáti, sádaspáti,
bṛ́haspáti, vánaspáti, ráthaspáti, jā́spáti (also jā́spati), nárāçaṅsa, tánūnáptṛ, tánūnápāt (tanū́ as
independent word), çúnaḥçépa. And ÇB. has a long list of metronymics having the anomalous
accentuation kāútsīpútra, gā́rgīpútra, etc.
1268. The compounds having an ordinary adjective as final member are (as already noticed)
comparatively few.
a. So far as can be gathered from the scanty examples occurring in the older language, they
retain the accent of the prior member: thus, gáviṣṭhira (AV. gavíṣṭhira), tanū́çubhra, máderaghu,
yajñádhira, sā́mavipra, tilámiçra (but tíla); but kṛṣṭapacyá ripening in cultivated soil.
1269. The adjective dependent compounds having as final member the bare root — or, if it
end in a short vowel, generally with an added t — are very numerous in all periods of the
language, as has been already repeatedly noticed (thus, 383 f–h, 1147). They are accented on
the root.
a. In a very few instances, the accent of words having apparently or conjecturally this origin
is otherwise laid: thus, áṅsatra, ánarviç, svā́vṛj, pratyákṣadṛç, púraṁdhi, óṣadhi, áramiṣ,
uçádagh, vatsápa, ábda.
b. Before a final root-stem appears not very seldom a case-form: for example, pataṁgá,
girāvṛ́dh, dhiyājúr, akṣṇayādrúh, hṛdispṛ́ç, divispṛ́ç, vanesáh, diviṣád, an̄geṣṭhā́, hṛsvás, pṛtsutúr,
apsujá.
C. The root-stem has sometimes a middle or passive value: for example, manoyúj yoked
(yoking themselves) by the will, hṛdayāvídh pierced to the heart, manuja born of Manu.
1270. Compounds made with verbal derivatives in a, both of action and of agency, are
numerous, and take the accent usually on their final syllable (as in the case of compounds with
verbal prefixes: 1148 m).

a. Examples are: hastagrābhá hand-grasping, devavandá god-praising, haviradá devouring
the offering, bhuvanacyavá shaking the world , vrātyabruvá calling one's self a vrātya;
akṣaparājayá failure at play, vaṣaṭkārá utterance of vashaṭ, gopoṣá prosperity in cattle,
an̄gajvará pain in the limbs.
b. In a few instances, the accent is (as in compounds with ordinary adjectives: above, 1268)
that of the prior member: thus, marúdvṛdha, sutékara, divícara (and other more questionable
words). And dúgha milking, yielding is so accented as final: thus, madhudúgha, kāmadúgha.
c. Case-forms are especially frequent in the prior members of compounds with adjective
derivatives in a showing guṇa-strengthening of the root: thus, fox example, abhayaṁkará,
yudhiṁgamá, dhanaṁjayá, puraṁdará, viçvambhará, divākará, talpeçayá, diviṣṭambhá.
1271. Compounds with verbal nouns and adjectives in ana are very numerous, and have the
accent always on the radical syllable (as in the case of compounds with verbal prefixes: 1150
e).
a. Examples are: keçavárdhana hair-increasing, āyuṣpratáraṇa life-lengthening, tanūpā́na
body-protecting; devahéḍana hatred of the gods , puṁsúvana giving birth to males.
b. A very few apparent exceptions as regards accent are really cases where the derivative
has lost its verbal character: thus, yamasādaná Yama's realm, āchádvidhāna means of
protection.
c. An accusative-form is sometimes found before a derivative in ana: thus, sarūpaṁkáraṇa,
ayakṣmaṁkáraṇa, subhāgaṁkáraṇa, vanaṁkáraṇa.
1272. a. The action-nouns in ya (1213) are not infrequent in composition as final member,
and retain their own proper accent (as in combination with prefixes). Sufficient examples were
given above (1213).
b. The same is true of the equivalent feminines in ya: see above, 1213 d.
c. The gerundives in ya (1213) hardly occur in the older language in combination with other
elements than prefixes. The two nīvibhāryà and prathamavāsyà (the latter a descriptive) have
the accent of the independent words of the same form; balavijñayá and áçvabudhya (?) are
inconsistent with these and with one another.
1273. Compounds made with the passive participle in ta or na have the accent of their prior
member (as do the combinations of the same words with prefixes: 1085 a).
a. Examples are: hástakṛta made with the hand , vīrájāta born of a hero, ghóṣabuddha
awakened by noise, prajā́patisṛṣṭa created by Prajāpati, devátta given by the gods; and, of
participles combined with prefixes, índraprasūta incited by Indra, bṛ́haspátipraṇutta driven away
by Brihaspati, ulkā́bhihata struck by a thunderbolt , vájravihata, saṁvat-

sarásammita commensurate with the year . AV. has the anomalous apsúsaṁçita quickened by the
waters.
b. A number of exceptions occur, in which the final syllable of the compound has the
accent: for example, agnitaptá, indrotá, pitṛvittá, rathakrītá, agnidagdhá  (beside agnídagdha),
kaviçastá (beside kavíçasta), kavipraçastá.
c. One or two special usages may be noticed. The participle gata, gone to, as final of a
compound, is used in a loose way in the later language to express relation of various kinds:
thus, jagatīgata existing in the world , tvadgata belonging to thee, sakhīgata relating to a friend,
citragata in a picture, putragataṁ sneham affection toward a son, etc. The participle bhūta
been, become is used in composition with a noun as hardly more than a grammatical device to
give it an adjective form: thus, idaṁ tamobhūtam this creation, being darkness (existing in the
condition of darkness); tāṁ ratnabhūtaṁ lokasya her, being the pearl of the world;  kṣetrabhūtā
smṛtā nārī bījabhūtah smrtaḥ pumān a woman is regarded as a field; a man, as seed;  and so
on.
d. 
The 
other 
participles 
only 
seldom 
occur 
as 
finals 
of 
compounds: 
thus,
prāsakārmukabibhrat bearing javelin and bow , açāstravidvāṅs not knowing the text-books,
arjunadarçivāṅs having seen Arjuna, apriyaçaṅsivāṅs announcing what is disagreeable,
gāutamabruvāṇá calling himself Gautama.
1274. Compounds with derivatives in ti have (like combinations with the prefixes: 1157 e)
the accent of the prior member.
a. Examples are: dhánasāti winning of wealth, sómapīti soma-drinking, deváhūti invocation of
the gods, námaūkti utterance of homage, havyádāti presentation of offerings; and so tokásāti,
deváhiti, rudráhūti, sūktókti, svagā́kṛti, díviṣṭi.
b. In nemádhiti, medhásāti, vanádhiti (all RV.), the accent of the prior member is changed
from penult to final.
c. Where the verbal character of the derivative is lost, the general rule of final accent
(1267) is followed: thus, devahetí weapon of the gods, devasumatí favor of the gods , brahmacití
Brahman-pile. Also in sarvajyāní entire ruin, the accent is that of compounds with ordinary
nouns.
1275. Compounds with a derivative in in as final member have (as in all other cases) the
accent on the ín.
a. Thus, ukthaçaṅsín psalm-singing, vratacārín vow-performing, ṛṣabhadāyín bullock-giving,
satyavādín truth-speaking, çroṇipratodín thigh-pounding.
1276. There is a group of compounds with derivatives in i, having the accent on the penult
or radical syllable.
a. Thus, pathirákṣi road-protecting, havirmáthi sacrifice-disturbing, ātmadū́ṣi soul-harming,
pathiṣádi sitting in the path, sahobhári strength-

bearing, vasuváni winning good-things, dhanasáni gaining wealth, manomúṣi mind-stealing,
phalagráhi setting fruit; and, from reduplicated root, urucákri making room. Compounds with
-sáni and -váni are especially frequent in Veda and Brāhmaṇa; as independent words, nouns,
these are accented saní and vaní. In many cases, the words are not found in independent use.
Combinations with prefixes do not occur in sufficient numbers to establish a distinct rule, but
they appear to be oftenest accented on the suffix (1155 f).
b. From √han are made in composition - ghni and -ghnī, with accent on the ending: thus,
sahasraghní, ahighnī́, çvaghnī́; -dhi from √dhā, (1155 g) has the accent in its numerous
compounds: thus, iṣudhí, garbhadhí, pucchadhí.
1277. Compounds with derivatives in van have (like combinations with prefixes: 1169 c) the
accent of the final member: namely, on the radical syllable.
a. 
Thus, somapā́van soma-drinking, baladā́van strength-giving, pāpakṛ́tvan evil-doing,
bahusū́van much-yielding, talpaçī́van lying on a couch , rathayā́van going in a chariot , druṣádvan
sitting on a tree, açrétvarī f. going at the head. The accent of the obscure words mātaríçvan
and mātaríbhvan is anomalous.
b. The few compounds with final man appear to follow the same rule as those with van:
thus, svādukṣádman sharing out sweets, āçuhéman steed-impelling.
1278. Compounds with other derivatives, of rare or sporadic occurrence, may be briefly
noticed: thus, in u, rāṣṭradipsú, devapīyú, govindú, vanargú (?): compare 1178 e; — in nu or
tnu, lokakṛtnú, surūpakṛtnú: compare 1196; — in tṛ, nṛpātṛ́, mandhātṛ́, haskartṛ́ (vasudhā́taras,
AV., is doubtless a false reading). The derivatives in as are of infrequent occurrence in
composition (as in combination with prefixes: above, 1151 k), and appear to be treated as
ordinary nouns: thus, yajñavacás (but hiraṇyatéjas, AV.).
B. Descriptive Compounds.
1279. In this division of the class of determinatives, the prior member stands to the other in
no distinct case-relation, but qualifies it adjectively or adverbially, according as it (the final
member) is noun or adjective.
a. Examples are: nīlotpala blue lotus, sarvaguṇa all good quality, priyasakha dear friend,
maharṣí great-sage, rajatapātrá silver cup; ájñata unknown, súkṛta well done, duṣkṛ́t ill-doing,
puruṣṭutá much praised, púnarṇava renewed.
b. The prior member is not always an adjective before a noun, or

an adverb before an adjective; other parts of speech are sometimes used adjectively and
adverbially in that position.
c. The boundary between descriptive and dependent compounds is not an absolute one; in
certain cases it is open to question, for instance, whether a prior noun, or adjective with noun-
value, is used more in a case-relation, or adverbially.
d. Moreover, where the final member is a derivative having both noun and adjective value,
it is not seldom doubtful whether an adjective compound is to be regarded as descriptive, made
with final adjective, or possessive, made with final noun. Sometimes the accent of the word
determines its character in this respect, but not always.
e. A satisfactorily simple and perspicuous classification of the descriptive compounds is not
practicable; we cannot hold apart throughout the compounds of noun and of adjective value, but
may better group both together, as they appear with prefixed elements of various kinds.
1280. The simplest case is that in which a noun as final member is preceded by a qualifying
adjective as prior member.
a. In this combination, both noun and adjective may be of any kind, verbal or otherwise.
The accent is (as in the corresponding class of dependent noun-compounds: 1267) on the final
syllable.
b. Thus, ajñātayakṣmá unknown disease, mahādhaná great wealth, kṣipraçyená swift hawk,
kṛṣṇaçakuní black bird, dakṣiṇāgní southern fire, urukṣití wide abode, adharahanú lower jaw,
itarajaná other folks, sarvātmán whole soul, ekavīrá sole hero, saptarṣí seven sages, tṛtīyasavaná
third libation, ekonaviṅçatí a score diminished by one, jāgratsvapná waking sleep, yāvayatsakhá
defending friend, apakṣīyamāṇapakṣá waning half.
c. There are not a few exceptions as regards accent. Especially, compounds with víçva (in
composition, accented viçvá), which itself retains the accent: thus, viçvádevās all the gods,
viçvámānuṣa every man. For words in ti, see below, 1287 d. Sporadic cases are madhyáṁdina,
vṛṣkā́pi, both of which show an irregular shift of tone in the prior member; and a few others.
d. Instead of an adjective, the prior member is in a few cases a noun used appositionally, or
with a quasi-adjective value. Thus, rājayakṣmá king-disease, brahmarṣi priest-sage, rājarṣi king-
sage, rājadanta king-tooth, devajana god-folk, duhitṛjana daughter-person, çamīlatā creeper
named çamī, muṣikākhyā the name "mouse", jayaçabda the word "conquer", ujhitaçabda the
word "deserted"; or, more figuratively, gṛhanaraka house-hell (house which is a hell ) , çāpāgni
curse-fire (consuming curse).
e. This group is of consequence, inasmuch as in possessive application

it is greatly extended, and forms a numerous class of appositional compounds: see below, 1302.
f. This whole subdivision, of nouns with preceding qualifying adjectives, is not uncommon;
but it is greatly (in AV., for example, more than five times) exceeded in frequency by the sub-
class of possessives of the same form: see below, 1298.
1281. The adverbial words which are most freely and commonly used as prior members of
compounds, qualifying the final member, are the verbal prefixes and the words of direction
related with them, and the inseparable prefixes, a or an, su, dus, etc. (1121). These are
combined not only with adjectives, but also, in quasi-adjectival value, with nouns; and the two
classes of combinations will best be treated together.
1282. Verbal adjectives and nouns with preceding adverbs. As the largest and most
important class under this head might properly enough be regarded the derivatives with
preceding verbal prefixes. These, however, have been here reckoned rather as derivatives from
roots combined with prefixes (1141), and have been treated under the head of derivation, in the
preceding chapter. In taking up the others, we will begin with the participles.
1283. The participles belonging to the tense-systems — those in ant (or at), māna, āna, vāṅs
— are only rarely compounded with any other adverbial element than the negative a or an,
which then takes the accent.
a. Examples are: ánadant, ádadat, ánaçnant, ásravant, álubhyant, ádāsyant, áditsant,
ádevayant; ámanyamāna, áhiṅsāna, áchidyamāna; ádadivāṅs, ábibhīvāṅs, atasthāna; and, with
verbal 
prefixes, ánapasphurant, ánāgamiṣyant, ánabhyāgamiṣyant, ávirādhayant, ávicācalat,
ápratimanyūyamāna.
b. Exceptions in regard to accent are very few: arundhatī́, ajárantī, acodánt (RV., once:
doubtless a false reading; the simple participle is códant); AV. has anipádyamāna for RV.
ánipadyamāna (and the published text has asaṁyánt, with a part of the manuscripts); ÇB. has
akāmáyamāna.
c. Of other compounds than with the negative prefix have been noted in the Veda -
punardīyamāna (in ápunard-) and súvidvāṅs. In alalābhávant and jañjanābhávant (RV.), as in
astaṁyánt and astameṣyánt (AV.), we have participles of a compound conjugation (1091), in
which, as has been pointed out, the accent is as in combinations with the verbal prefixes.

1284. The passive (or past) participle in ta or na is much more variously compounded; and
in general (as in the case of the verbal prefixes: 1085 a) the preceding adverbial element has
the accent.
a. Thus, with the negative a or an (by far the most common case): ákṛta, ádabdha, áriṣṭa,
ánādhṛṣṭa, áparājita, ásaṁkhyāta, ánabhyārūḍha, áparimitasamṛddha; — with su, sújāta, súhuta,
súsaṁçita, svàraṁkṛta; — with dus, dúçcarita, dúrdhita and dúrhita, dúḥçṛta; — with other
adverbial 
words, dáṅsujūta, návajata, sánaçruta, svayáṁkṛta, trípratiṣṭhita: áraṁkṛta and
kakajā́kṛta are rather participles of a compound conjugation.
b. Exceptions in regard to accent are: with a or an, anāçastá, apraçastá, and, with the
accent of the participle retracted to the root, amṛ́ta, adṛ́ṣṭa, acítta, ayúta myriad, atū́rta (beside
átūrta) , asū́rta (? beside sū́rta); — with su (nearly half as numerous as the regular cases),
subhūtá, sūktá, supraçastá, svā́kta, sukṛtá  and sujātá (beside súkṛta and sújāta), and a few
others; with dus (quite as numerous as the regular cases), duritá (also dúrita), duruktá, duṣkṛtá
(also dúṣkṛta) , durbhūtá; 
with sa, sajātá; with other adverbs, amotá, ariṣṭutá, tuvijātá,
prācīnopavītá, tadānīṁdugdhá, prātardugdhá, etc., and the compounds with puru, purujātá,
puruprajātá, purupraçastá, puruṣṭutá, etc., and with svayam, svayaṁkṛtá etc. The proper name
aṣāḍhá stands beside áṣāḍha; and AV. has abhinná for RV. ábhinna.
1285. The gerundives occur almost only in combination with the negative prefix, and have
usually the accent on the final syllable.
a. Examples are: anāpyá, anindyá, abudhyá, asahyá, ayodhyá, amokyá ; adviṣeṇyá; ahnavāyyá;
and, along with verbal prefixes, the cases are asaṁkhyeyá, apramṛṣyá, anapavṛjyá, anatyudyá,
anādhṛṣyá, avimokyá, anānukṛtyá (the accent of the simple word being saṁkhyéya etc.).
b. Exceptions in regard to accent are: ánedya, ádābhya, ágohya, ájoṣya, áyabhya . The two
anavadharṣyà and anativyādhyà (both AV.) belong to the yà-division (1213 b) of gerundives, and
have retained the accent of the simple word. And ághnya and aghnyá occur together.
c. The only compounds of these words with other adverbial elements in V. are súyabhya
(accented like its twin áyabhya) and prathamavāsyà (which retains the final circumflex), and
perhaps ekavādyá.
d. The neuter nouns of the same form (1213 c: except sadhástutya) retain their own accent
after an adverbial prior member: thus, purvapā́yya, pūrvapéya, amutrabhū́ya; and sahaçéyya.
And the negatived gerundives instanced above are capable of being viewed as possessive
compounds with such nouns.
e. Some of the other verbal derivatives which have rules of their own as to accent etc. may
be next noticed.

1286. The root-stem (pure root, or with t added after a short final vowel: 1147 d) is very
often combined with a preceding adverbial word, of various kinds; and in the combination it
retains the accent.
a. Examples are: with inseparable prefixes, adrúh not harming, asū́ not giving birth, arúc
not shining; sukṛ́t well-doing, suçrút hearing well; duṣkṛ́t ill-doing, dūḍā́ç (199 d) impious; sayúj
joining together, samád conflict; sahajā́ born together, sahaváh carrying together; — with other
adverbs, amājúr growing old at home, uparispṛ́ç touching upward, punarbhū́ appearing again,
prātaryúj harnessed early, sadyaḥkrī́ bought the same day , sākaṁvṛ́dh growing up together,
sadaṁdí ever-binding, viṣūvṛ́t turning to both sides, vṛthāsáh easily overcoming; — with
adjectives used adverbially, uruvyác wide-spreading, prathamajā́ first-born, raghuṣyád swift-
moving, navasū́ newly giving birth, ekajá only born, çukrapíç brightly adorned, dvijá twice born,
trivṛ́t triple, svarā́j self-ruling; — with nouns used adverbially, çambhū́ beneficent, sūryaçvít
shining like the sun, īçānakṛ́t acting as lord, svayambhū́ self-existent; and, with accusative case-
form, pataṁgá going by flight.
b. When, however, a root-stem is already in composition, whether with a verbal prefix or an
element of other character, the further added negative itself takes the accent (as in case of an
ordinary adjective: below, 1288 a): thus, for example, ánākṣit not abiding, ánāvṛt not turning
back, ávidviṣ not showing hostility, áduṣkṛt not ill-doing, ánaçvadā not giving a horse , ápaçuhan
not slaying cattle (anāgā́s would be an exception, if it contained √gā: which is very unlikely).
Similar combinations with su seem to retain the radical accent: thus, supratúr, svābhū́, svāyúj :
svā́vṛj is an unsupported exception.
c. A few other exceptions occur, mostly of doubtful character, as prátiprāç, sadhástha,
ádhrigu, and the words having añc as final member (407 ff.: if this element is not, after all, a
suffix) compare 1269 a.
1287. Other verbal derivatives, requiring to be treated apart from the general body of
adjectives, are few and of minor importance. Thus:
a. The derivatives in a are in great part of doubtful character, became of the possibility of
their being used with substantive value to make a possessive compound. The least ambiguous,
probably, are the derivatives from present-stems (1148 j), which have the accent on the suffix:
thus, asunvá, apaçyá, akṣudhyá, avidasyá, anāmṛṇá, sadāpṛṇá, punarmanyá ; and with them
belong such cases as stṛpá, avṛdhá, araṁgamá, urukramá, evāvadá, satrāsahá, punaḥsará,
puraḥsará; and the nouns sāyambhavá, sahacārá, prātaḥsāvá, mithoyodhá. Differently accented,
on the other hand, although apparently of the same formation, are such as ánapasphura,
ánavahvara (compare the compounds noticed at 1286 b), sadā́vṛdha, sū́bharva, nyagródha,
puroḍā́ça, sadhamā́da, sudúgha, supáca, suháva, and others. Words like adábha, durháṇa,
sukára, suyáma, are probably possessives.

b. The derivatives in van keep in general the accent of the final member, on the root
(compare 1169 c, 1277): thus, āçupátvan and raghupátvan swift-flying, puroyā́van going in
front, sukṛ́tvan well-doing; and sutárman and suváhman and raghuyā́man are probably to be
classed with them. But the negative prefix has the accent even before these: thus, áyajvan,
árāvan, áprayutvan; and satyámadvan (if it be not possessive) has the accent of its prior
member.
c. A few words in i seem to have (as in dependent compounds: 1276) he accent on the
radical syllable: thus, durgṛ́bhi, ṛjuváni, tuviṣváṇi.
d. The derivatives in ti are variously treated: the negative prefix has always the accent
before them: as, ácitti, ábhūti, ánāhūti; with su and dus, the compound is accented now on the
prefix and now on the final, and in some words on either (súnīti and sunītí, dúṣṭuti and
duṣṭutí); with other elements, the accent of the prefix prevails: thus, sáhuti, sadhástuti, puróhiti,
pūrvápīti, pūrvyástuti.
e. The derivatives in in have, as in general, the accent on the suffix: thus, pūrvāsín,
bahucārín, sādhudevín, savāsín, kevalādín. But, with the negative prefix, ánāmin, ávitārin.
f. Other combinations are too various in treatment, or are represented by too few examples
in accentuated texts, to justify the setting up of rules respecting them.
1288. Of the remaining combinations, those made with the inseparable prefixes form in some
measure a class by themselves.
1. a. The negative prefix a or an, when it directly negatives the word to which it is added,
has a very decided tendency to take the accent.
b. We have seen above (1283) that it does so even in the case of present and perfect and
future participles, although these in combination with a verbal prefix retain their own accent
(1085: but there are exceptions, as avadánt, apaçyánt, etc. ÇB.); and also in the case of a root-
stem, if this be already compounded with another element (1286 b). And the same is true of its
other combinations.
c. Thus, with various adjective words: átandra, ádabhra, ádāçuri, ánṛju, ádevayu, átṛṣṇaj,
átavyāṅs, ánāmin, ádvayāvin, ápracetas, ánapatyavant, ánupadasvant, ápramāyuka, ámamri,
áprajajñi, ávidīdhayu, ánagnidagdha, ákāmakarçana, ápaçcāddaghvan. Further, with nouns, ápati,
ákumāra, ábrāhmaṇa, ávidyā, āçraddhā, ávrātya.
d. But there are a number of exceptions, in which the accent is on the final syllable,
without regard to the original accentuation of the final member: thus, for example, acitrá,
açrīrá, aviprá, ayajñiyá, anāsmāká, asthūrí, anāçú, ajarayú, anāmayitnú; and in amítra enemy,
and avī́ra unmanly, there is a retraction of the accent from the final syllable of the final
member to its penult.

2. e. The prefixes su and dus have this tendency in a much less degree, and their
compounds are very variously accented, now on the prefix, now on the final syllable, now on
the accented syllable of the final member; and occasionally on either of two syllables.
f. Thus, for example, súbhadra, súvipra, súpakva, súbrāhmaṇa, súbhiṣaj ; sutīrthá, suvasaná,
suṣārathí, supāçá, sucitrá; suçéva, suhótṛ: suvī́ra is like avī́ra; — durmitrá, duṣvápnya; and
ducchúnā (168 b), with irregular retraction of accent ( çuná).
3. g. The compounds with sa are too few to furnish occasion for separate mention; and
those with the interrogative prefix in its various forms are also extremely rare in the Veda:
examples are kucará, katpayá, kábandha, kunannamá, kumārá, kúyava, kuṣáva .
1289. The verbal prefixes are sometimes used in a general adverbial way, qualifying a
following adjective or noun.
a. Examples of such combinations are not numerous in the Veda. Their accentuation is
various, though the tone rests oftenest on the preposition. Thus, ádhipati over-lord, áparūpa
mis-form, prátiçatru opposing foe, prápada fore part of foot, práṇapāt great-grandchild, vípakva
quite done, sámpriya mutually dear; upajíhvikā side tongue (with retraction of the accent of
jihvā́); antardeçá intermediate direction, pradív forward heaven, prapitāmahá (also prápitāmaha)
great-grandfather, pratijaná opponent, vyadhvá midway. These compounds are more frequent
with possessive value (below, 1305).
b. This use of the verbal prefixes is more common later, and some of them have a regular
value in such compounds. Thus, ati denotes excess, as in atidūra very far, atibhaya exceeding
fear, átipūruṣa (ÇB.) chief man; adhi, superiority, as in adhidanta upper-tooth, adhistrī chief
woman; abhi is intensive, as in abhinamra much incliving, abhinava span-new, abhirucira
delightful; ā signifies somewhat, as in ākuṭila somewhat crooked, ānīla bluish; upa denotes
something accessory or secondary, as in upapurāṇa additional Purāna; pari, excess, as in
paridurbala very weak; prati, opposition, as in pratipakṣa opposing side, pratipustaka copy; vi,
variation or excess, as in vidūra very far, vipāṇḍu greyish, vikṣudra respectively small; sam,
completeness, as in sampakva quite ripe.
1290. Other compounds with adverbial prior members are quite irregularly accented.
Thus, the compounds with puru, on the final (compare the participles with puru, 1284 b):
as, purudasmá, purupriyá, puruçcandrá; those with púnar, on the prior member, as púnarṇava,
púnarmagha, púnaryuvan, púnarvasu (but punaḥsará etc.); those with satás, satīná, satyá, the
same, as satómahant, satīnámanyu, satyámugra; a few combinations of nouns in tṛ and ana with
adverbs akin with the prefixes, on the final syllable, as puraëtṛ́, puraḥsthātṛ́, upariçayaná,
prātaḥsavaná; and miscellaneous cases are mithóavadyapa, háriçcandra, álpaçayu, sādhvaryá,
yācchreṣṭhá and yāvacchreṣṭhá, jyógāmayāvin.

1291. One or two exceptional cases may be noted, as follows:
a. An adjective is sometimes preceded by a noun standing toward it in a quasi-adverbial
relation expressive of comparison or likeness: e. g. çúkababhru (VS.) parrot-brown, ū́rṇāmṛdu
(TB.) soft as wool, prāṇapriya dear as life, kuçeçayarajomṛdu soft as lotus-pollen, bakālīna
hidden like a heron, mattamātan̄gagāmin moving like a maddened elephant.
b. An adjective is now and then qualified by another adjective: e. g. kṛṣṇāita dark-gray,
dhūmrárohita grayish red: and compare the adjectives of intermediate direction, 1257 c.
c. The adjective pūrva is in the later language frequently used as final member of a
compound in which its logical value is that of an adverb qualifying the other member (which is
said to retain its own accent). Thus, dṛṣṭapūrva previously seen, pariṇītapūrva already married,
aparijñātapūrva not before known , somapītapūrva having formerly drunk soma, strīpūrva
formerly a woman.
III. Secondary Adjective Compounds.
1292. a. A compound having a noun as its final member very often wins secondarily the
value of an adjective, being inflected in the three genders to agree with the noun which it
qualifies, and used in all the constructions of an adjective.
b. This class of compounds, as was pointed out above (1247. III.), falls into the two
divisions of A. Possessives, having their adjective character given them by addition of the idea
o f possessing; and B. those in which the final member is syntactically dependent on or
governed by the prior member.
A. Possessive Compounds.
1293. The possessives are noun-compounds of the preceding class, determinatives, of all its
various subdivisions, to which is given an adjective inflection, and which take on an adjective
meaning of a kind which is most conveniently and accurately defined by adding having or
possessing to the meaning of the determinative.
a. Thus: the dependent sūryatejás sun's brightness becomes the

possessive sū́ryatejas possessing the brightness of the sun;  yajñakāmá desire of sacrifice
becomes yajñákāma having desire of sacrifice; the descriptive bṛhadratha great chariot becomes
the possessive bṛhádratha having great chariots; áhasta not hand becomes ahastá handless;
durgandhi ill savor becomes durgándhi of ill savor; and so on.
b. A copulative compound is not convertible into an adjective directly, any more than is a
simple noun, but requires, like the latter, a possessive suffix or other means: e. g.
vāgghastavant, doṣaguṇin, rajastamaska, açirogrīva, anṛgyajus . A very small number of
exceptions, however, are found: thus, somendrá (TS.), stómapṛṣṭha (VS. TS.), hastyṛ̀ṣabha (ÇB.),
dāsīniṣka (ChU.), and, later, cakramusala, sadānanda, saccidānanda, sān̄khyayoga (as n. pr.),
balābala, bhūtabhāutika.
c. The name given by the native grammarians to the possessive compounds is bahuvrīhi: the
word is an example of the class, meaning possessing much rice.
d. The name "relative", instead of possessive, sometimes applied to this class, is an utter
misnomer; since, though the meaning of such a compound (as of any attributive word) is easily
cast into a relative form, its essential character lies in the possessive verb which has
nevertheless to be added, or in the possessive case of the relative which must be used: thus,
mahākavi and āyurdā, descriptive and dependent, are "relative" also, who is a great poet , and
that is life-giving, but bṛhadratha, possessive, means who has a great chariot, or whose is a
great chariot.
1294. a. That a noun, simple or compound, should be added to another noun, in an
appositive way, with a value virtually attributive, and that such nouns should occasionally gain
by frequent association and application an adjective form also, is natural enough, and occurs in
many languages; the peculiarity of the Sanskrit formation lies in two things. First, that such use
should have become a perfectly regular and indefinitely extensible one in the case of
compounded words, so that any compound with noun-final may be turned without alteration
into an adjective, while to a simple noun must be added an adjective-making suffix in order to
adapt it to adjective use: for example, that while hasta must become hastin and bāhu must
become bāhumant, hiraṇyahasta and mahābāhu change from noun to adjective value with no
added ending. And second, that the relation of the qualified noun to the compound should have
come to be so generally that of possession, not of likeness, nor of appurtenance, nor of any
other relation which is as naturally involved in such a construction: that we may only say, for
example, mahābāhuḥ puruṣaḥ man with great arms , and not also mahābāhur maṇiḥ jewel for a
great arm, or mahābāhavaḥ çākhāḥ branches like great arms.
b. There are, however, in the older language a few derivative adjective compounds which
imply the relation of appurtenance rather than that of possession, and which are with
probability to be viewed as survivals of a state of things antecedent to the specialization of the
general class as

possessive (compare the similar exceptions under possessive suffixes, 1230 g, 1233 f). Examples
are: viçvā́nara of or for all men, belonging to all (and so viçvákṛṣṭi, -carṣaṇi, -kṣiti, -gotra, -
manus, -āyu, and sarvápaçu, saptámānuṣa), viçváçārada of every autumn, vipathá for bad roads,
dvirājá [battle] of two kings , áçvapṛṣṭha carried on horseback , vīrápastya abiding with heroes ,
pūrṇámāsa at full moon, adévaka for no divinity, bahudevata or -tyà for many divinities,
aparisaṁvatsara not lasting a fall year , ekādaçakapāla for eleven dishes, somendrá for Soma
and Indra. And the compounds with final member in ana mentioned at 1296 b are probably of
the same character. But also in the later language, some of the so-called dvigu-compounds
(1312) belong with these: so dvigu itself, as meaning worth two cows , dvināu bought for two
ships; also occasional cases like devāsura [saṁgrāma] of the gods and demons , narahaya of
man and horse, cakramusala with discus and club, gurutalpa violating the teacher's bed .
1295. The possessive compound is distinguished from its substrate, the determinative,
generally by a difference of accent. This difference is not of the same nature in all the divisions
of the class; but oftenest, the possessive has as a compound the natural accent of its prior
member (as in most of the examples given above).
1296. Possessively used dependent compounds, or possessive dependents, are very much
less common than those corresponding to the other division of determinatives.
a. Further examples are: mayū́raroman having the plumes of peacocks , agnítejas having the
brightness of fire, jñatímukha wearing the aspect of relatives , pátikāma desiring a husband,
hastipāda having an elephant's feet, rājanyàbandhu having kshatriyas for relatives.
b. The accent is, as in the examples given, regularly that of the prior member, and
exceptions are rare and of doubtful character. A few compounds with derivatives in ana have
the accent of the final member: e. g. indrapā́na serving as drink for Indra , devasádana serving
as seat for the gods, rayisthā́na being source of wealth;  but they contain no implication of
possession, and are possibly in character, as in accent, dependent (but compare 1294 b). Also a
few in as, as nṛcákṣas men-beholding, nṛvā́has men-bearing, kṣetrasā́dhas field-prospering, are
probably to be judged in the same way.
1297. Possessively used descriptive compounds, or possessive descriptives, are extremely
numerous and of every variety of character; and some kinds of combination which are rare in
proper descriptive use are very common as possessives.
a. They will be taken up below in order, according to the character-

acter of the prior member — whether the noun-final be preceded by a qualifying adjective, or
noun, or adverb.
1298. Possessive compounds in which a noun is preceded by a qualifying ordinary adjective
are (as pointed out above, 1280 f) very much more common than descriptives of the same form.
a. They regularly and usually have the accent of their prior member: thus, anyárūpa of
other form, ugrábāhu having powerful arms, jīváputra having living sons, dīrgháçmaçru
longbearded, bṛhácchravas of great renown, bhū́rimūla many-rooted, mahā́vadha bearing a great
weapon, viçvárūpa having all forms, çukrávarṇa of bright color, çivā́bhimarçana of propitious
touch, satyásaṁdha of true promises, sárvān̄ga whole-limbed, sváyaças having own glory,
háritasraj wearing yellow garlands.
b. Exceptions, however, in regard to accent are not rare (a seventh or eighth of the whole
number, perhaps). Thus, the accent is sometimes that of the final member; especially with
derivatives in as, as tuvirā́dhas, purupéças, pṛthupákṣas, and others in which (as above, 1296 b)
a determinative character may be suspected: thus, urujráyas beside urujrí, uruvyácas beside
uruvyác, and so on; but also with those of other final, as ṛjuhásta, çitikákṣa etc., kṛṣṇakárṇa,
citradṛ́çika, tuviçúṣma, ṛjukrátu, pṛthupárçu, puruvártman, raghuyā́man, vīḍupátman. In a very
few cases, the accent is retracted from the final to the first syllable of the second member:
thus, aṅhubhéda, tuvigrī́va, puruvī́ra, pururū́pa, çitibā́hu  (also çitibāhú). The largest class is that
of compounds which take the accent upon their final syllable (in part, of course, not
distinguishable from those which retain the accent of the final member): for example, bahvanná,
nīlanakhá, puruputrá, viçvān̄gá, svapatí, tuvipratí, pṛçiparnī́ f., darçataçrī́, pūtirajjú, asitajñú,
pṛthugmán, bahuprajás.
c. The adjective víçva all, as prior member of a compound (and also in derivation), changes
its accent regularly to viçvá; sárva whole, all does the same in a few cases.
1299. Possessive compounds with a participle preceding and qualifying the final noun-
member are numerous, although such a compound with simple descriptive value is almost
unknown. The accent is, with few exceptions, that of the prior member.
a. The participle is oftenest the passive one, in ta or na. Thus, chinnápakṣa with severed
wing, dhṛtárāṣṭra of firmly held royalty, hatámātṛ whose mother is slain , iddhā́gni whose fire is
kindled, uttānáhasta with outstretched hand, práyatadakṣiṇa having presented sacrificial gifts;
and, with prefixed negative, áriṣṭavīra whose men are unharmed, átaptatanu of unburned
substance, ánabhimlātavarṇa of untarnished color. Exceptions in regard to accent are very few:
there have been noticed only paryastākṣá, vyastakeçī́ f., achinnaparṇá.

b. Examples occur of a present participle in the same situation. In about half the
(accentuated) instances, it gives its own accent to the compound: thus, dyutádyāman,
dhṛṣádvarṇa etc., çucádratha, rúçadvatsa etc., bhrā́jajjanman etc., saṁyádvīra, stanáyadama,
sā́dhadiṣṭi; in the others, the accent is drawn forward to the final syllable of the participle (as
in the compounds with governing participle: below, 1309): thus, dravátpāṇi etc. (dravát also
occurs as adverb), rapçádūdhan, svanádratha, arcáddhūma, bhandádiṣṭi, krandádiṣṭi . With these
last agrees in form jarádaṣṭi attaining old age, long-lived;  but its make-up, in view of its
meaning, is anomalous.
c. The RV. has two compounds with the perfect middle participle as prior member: thus,
yuyujānásapti with harnessed coursers (perhaps rather having harnessed their coursers), and
dadṛçānápavi (with regular accent, instead of dádṛçāna, as elsewhere irregularly in this
participle) with conspicuous wheel-rims.
d. Of a nearly participial character is the prior element in çrútkarṇa (RV.) of listening ear;
and with this are perhaps accordant dī́dyagni and sthā́raçman (RV., each once).
1300. Possessive compounds having a numeral as prior member are very common, and for
the most part follow the same rule of accent which is followed by compounds with other
adjectives: excepted are those beginning with dvi and tri, which accent in general the final
member.
a. Examples with other numerals than dvi and tri 
are: ékacakra, ékaçīrṣan, ékapad,
cáturan̄ga, cátuṣpakṣa, pán̄cān̄guri, pán̄cāudana, ṣáḍaçva, ṣáṭpad, saptájihva, saptámātṛ, aṣṭā́pad,
aṣṭáputra, návapad, návadvāra, dáçaçākha, dáçaçīrṣan, dvā́daçāra, triṅçádara, çatáparvan,
çatádant, sahásraṇāman, sahásramūla.
b. Exceptions in regard to accent are but few, and have the tone on the final syllable,
whatever may be that belonging originally to the final member; they are mostly stems in final
a, used by substitution for others in an, i, or a consonant: thus, caturakṣá etc. (akṣán or ákṣi:
431), ṣaḍahá etc. (áhan or áhar: 430 a), daçavṛṣá etc. (vṛ́ṣan) , ekarātrá etc. (rā́tri or rā́trī),
ekarcá etc. (ṛ́c); but also a few others, as ṣaḍyogá, aṣṭāyogá, çatārghá, sahasrārghá, ekapará
(?).
c. The compounds with dvi and tri for the most part have the accent of their final member:
thus, for example, dvijánman, dvidhā́ra, dvibándhu, dvivartaní, dvipád; tritántu, trinā́bhi, triçóka,
trivárūtha, tricakrá, triçīrṣán, tripád. A number of words, however, follow the general analogy,
and accent the numeral: thus, for example, dvípakṣa, dvíçavas, dvyā̀sya, tríṣandhi, tryàra,
tryā̀çir, and sometimes dvípad and trípad in AV. As in the other numeral compounds, a
substituted stem in a is apt to take the accent on the final: thus, dvivṛṣá and trivṛṣá, dvirājá,
dvirātrá, tryāyuṣá, tridivá; and a few of other

character with tri follow the same rule: thus, trikaçá, trināká, tribandhú, tryudhán, tribarhís ,
etc.
d. The neuter, or also the feminine, of numeral compounds is often used substantively, with
a collective or abstract value, and the accent is then regularly on the final syllable: see below,
1312.
1301. Possessive compounds having as prior member a noun which has a quasi-adjective
value in qualifying the final member are very frequent, and show certain specialities of usage.
a. Least peculiar is a noun of material as prior member (hardly to be reckoned as
possessive dependents, because the relation of material is not regularly expressed by a case:
295): thus, híraṇyahasta gold-handed, híraṇyasraj with golden garlands, áyaḥsthūṇa having
brazen supports, rajatánābhi of silver navel.
1302. Especially common is the use of a noun as prior member to qualify the other
appositionally, or by way of equivalence (the occasional occurrence of determinatives of this
character has been noticed above, 1280 d). These may conveniently be called appositional
possessives. Their accent is that of the prior member, like the ordinary possessive descriptives.
a. Examples are: áçvaparṇa horse-winged, or having horses as wings (said of a chariot),
bhū́migṛha having the earth as house , índrasakhi having Indra for friend, agníhotṛ having Agni
as priest, gandharvápatnī having a Gandharva for spouse , çūráputra having hero-sons, jarā́mṛtyu
having old age as mode of death, living till old age , agnívāsas fire-clad, tadanta ending with
that, cāracakṣus using spies for eyes, víṣṇuçarmanāman named Vishnuçarman; and, with
pronoun instead of noun, tvā́dūta having thee as messenger, tádapas having this for work.
Exceptions in regard to accent occur here, as in the more regular descriptive formation: thus,
agnijihvá, vṛṣaṇaçvá, dhūmaçikhá, pavīnasá, asáunā́ma, tatkúla , etc.
b. Not infrequently, a substantively used adjective is the final member in such a compound:
thus, índrajyeṣṭha having Indra as chief, mánaḥṣaṣṭha having the mind as sixth, sómaçreṣṭha of
which soma is best, ekapará of which the ace is highest  (?), ásthibhūyas having bone as the
larger part, chiefly of bone, abhirūpabhūyiṣṭha chiefly composed of worthy persons , daçāvara
having ten as the lowest number , cintāpara having meditation as highest object or occupation,
devoted to meditation, niḥçvāsaparama much addicted to sighing.
c. Certain words are of especial frequency in the compounds here described, and have in
part won a peculiar application. Thus:
d. With ādi beginning or ādika or ādya first are made compounds signifying the person or
thing specified along with others, such a person or thing et cetera. For example, devā
indrādayaḥ the gods having Indra as first , i. e. the gods Indra etc. , marīcyādīn munīn Marīci
and the other

sages, svāyambhuvādyāḥ saptāi ’te manavaḥ those seven Manus, Svāyambhuva etc. ,
agniṣṭomādikān the sacrifices Agnishtoma and so on . Or the qualified noun is omitted, as in
annapānendhanādīni food, drink, fuel, etc. , dānadharmādikaṁ caratu bhavān let your honor
practise liberality, religious rites, and the like. The particles evam and iti are also sometimes
used by substitution as prior members: thus, evamādi vacanam words to this and the like
effect; ato ‘ham bravīmi kartavyaḥ saṁcayo nityam ityādi  hence I say "accumulation is ever to
be made" etc.
e. 
Used 
in 
much 
the 
same 
way, 
but 
less 
often, 
is prabhṛti 
beginning: thus,
viçvāvasuprabhṛtibhir gandharvāiḥ with the Gandharvas Viçvāvasu etc.;  especially adverbially, in
measurements of space and time, as tatprabhṛti or tataḥprabhṛti thenceforward.
f. Words meaning foregoer, predecessor, and the like — namely, pūrva, pūrvaka, puraḥsara,
puraskṛta, purogama — are often employed in a similar manner, and especially adverbially, but
for the most part to denote accompaniment, rather than antecedence, of that which is
designated by the prior member of the compound: e. g. smitapūrvam with a smile,
anāmayapraçnapūrvakam with inquiries after health, pitāmahapurogama accompanied by the
Great Father.
g. The noun mātrā measure stands as final of a compound which is used adjectively or in
the substantive neuter to signify a limit that is not exceeded, and obtains thus the virtual value
of mere, only: thus, jalamātreṇa vartayan living by water only (lit. by that which has water for
its measure or limit), garbhacyutimātreṇa by merely issuing from the womb , prāṇāyātrikamātraḥ
syāt let him be one possessing what does not exceed the preservation of life;  uktamātre tu
vacane but the words being merely uttered .
h. The noun artha object, purpose is used at the end of a compound, in the adverbial
accusative neuter, to signify for the take of or the like: thus, yajñasiddhyartham in order to the
accomplishment of the sacrifice (lit. in a manner having the accomplishment of the sacrifice as
its object), damayantyartham for Damayantī's sake (with Damayantī as object).
i. Other examples are ābhā, kalpa, in the sense of like, approaching: thus, hemābha gold-
like, mṛtakalpa nearly dead, pratipannakalpa almost accomplished; — vidhā, in the sense of
kind, sort: thus, tvadvidha of thy sort, púruṣavidha of human kind; — prāya, in the sense of
mostly, often, and the like: thus, duḥkhaprāya full of pain, tṛṇaprāya abounding in grass,
nirgamanaprāya often going out; — antara (in substantive neuter), in the sense of other: thus,
deçāntara another region (lit. that which has a difference of region ) , janmāntarāṇi other
existences, çākhāntare in another text.
1303. In appositional possessive compounds, the second member, if it designates a part of
the body, sometimes logically signifies that part to which what is designated by the prior
member belongs, that on or in which it is.

a. Thus, ghṛtápṛṣṭha butter-backed, mádhujihva honey-tongued, niṣkágrīva and maṇigrīva
necklace-necked, pā́trahasta vessel-handed, vájrabahu lightning-armed, ásṛn̄mukha blood-faced,
kīlā́lodhan mead-uddered, vā́jajaṭhara sacrifice-bellied, vāṣpakaṇvha with tears in the throat ,
çraddhā́manas with faith in the heart;  with irregular accent, dhūmākṣī́ f. smoke-eyed, açrumukhī́
f . tear-faced; and khā́dihasta ring-handed (khādí). In the later language, such compounds are
not infrequent with words meaning hand: thus, çastrapāṇi having a sword in the hand ,
laguḍahasta carrying a staff.
1304. Of possessive compounds having an adverbial element as prior member, the most
numerous by far are those made with the inseparable prefixes. Their accent is various. Thus:
a. In compounds with the negative prefix a or an (in which the latter logically negatives the
imported idea of possession), the accent is prevailingly on the final syllable, without regard to
the original accent of the final member. For example: anantá having no end, abalá not
possessing strength, arathá without chariot, açraddhá faithless, amaṇí without ornament, açatrú
without a foe, avarmán not cuirassed, adánt toothless, apád footless, atejás without brightness,
anārambhaṇá not to be gotten hold of , apratimāná incomparable, aducchuná bringing no harm,
apakṣapucchá without sides or tail.
b. But a number of examples (few in proportion to those already instanced) have the prefix
accented (like the simple descriptives: 1288 a): thus, ákṣiti indestructible, águ kineless, ágopā
without shepherd, ájīvana lifeless, ánāpi without friends, áçiçvī 
f. without young, ámṛtyu
deathless, ábrahman without priest, ávyacas without extension, áhavis without oblation, and a
few others; AV. has áprajas, but ÇB. aprajás. A very few have the accent on the penult: namely,
açéṣas, ajā́ni, and avī́ra (with retraction, from vīrá) , apútra (do., from putrá); and AV. has
abhrā́tṛ, but RV. abhrātṛ́.
c. In compounds with the prefixes of praise and dispraise, su and dus, the accent is in the
great majority of cases that of the final member: thus, sukálpa of easy make, subhága well
portioned, sunákṣatra of propitious star, suputrá having excellent sons, sugopā́ well-shepherded,
sukīrtí of good fame, sugándhi fragrant, subāhú well-armed, suyáṁtu of easy control, sukrátu of
good capacity, suhā́rd good-hearted, susráj well-garlanded, suvárman well-cuirassed, suvā́sas
well-clad, supráṇīti well guiding; durbhága ill-portioned, durdṛ́çīka of evil aspect, durdhára hard
to restrain, durgándhi ill-savored, durādhī́ of evil designs, durdhártu hard to restrain, duṣṭárītu
hard to excel, duratyétu hard to cross, durdhúr ill-yoked, durṇā́man ill-named, durvā́sas ill-clad.
d. There are, however, a not inconsiderable number of instances in which the accent of
these compounds is upon the final syllable: thus, suçiprá well-lipped, svapatyá of good progeny,
susaṁkāçá of good aspect, svan̄gurí well-fingered, sviṣú having good arrows, supīvás well
fatted;

and compounds with derivatives in ana, as suvijñaná of easy discernment, sūpasarpaṇá of easy
approach, duçcyavaná hard to shake; and AV. has suphalá and subandhú against RV. suphála
and subándhu. Like avī́ra, suvī́ra shows retraction of accent. Only dúrāçir has the tone on the
prefix.
e. On the whole, the distinction by accent of possessive from determinative is less clearly
shown in the words made with su and dus than in any other body of compounds.
f. The associative prefix sa or (less often) sahá is treated like an adjective element, and
itself takes the accent in a possessive compound: thus, sákratu of joint will, sánāman of like
name, sárūpa of similar form, sáyoni having a common origin, sávācas of assenting words,
sátoka having progeny along, with one's progeny, sábrāhmaṇa together with the Brahmans ,
sámūla with the root , sā́ntardeça with the intermediate directions;  sahágopa with the shepherd,
sahávatsa accompanied by one's young, sahápatnī having her husband with her , sahápūruṣa
along with our men.
g. In RV. (save in a doubtful case or two), only saha in such compounds gives the meaning
o f having with one, accompanied by;  and, since saha governs the instrumental, the words
beginning with it might be of the prepositional class (below, 1310). But in AV. both sa and
saha have this value (as illustrated by examples given above); and in the later language, the
combinations with sa are much the more numerous.
h. There are a few exceptions, in which the accent is that of the final member: thus, sajóṣa,
sajóṣas, sadṛ́ça, sapráthas, sabā́dhas, samanyú and AV. shows the accent on the final syllable in
sān̄gá (ÇB. sā́n̄ga) and the substantivized (1312) savidyutá.
i. Possessive compounds with the exclamatory prefixes ka etc. are too few in the older
language to furnish ground for any rule as to accent: kábandha is perhaps an example of such.
1305. Possessive compounds in which a verbal prefix is used as prior member with adjective
value, qualifying a noun as final member, are found even in the oldest language, and are rather
more common later (compare the descriptive compounds, above, 1289; and the prepositional,
below, 1310). They usually have the accent of the prefix.
a. Most common are those made with pra, vi, and sam; thus, for example, prámahas having
exceeding might, práçravas widely famed; vígrāva of wry neck, vyàn̄ga having limbs away or
gone, limbless, víjāni wifeless, víparva and víparus jointless, vyàdhvan of wide ways, vímanas
both of wide mind and mindless, vívācas of discordant speech; sámpatnī having one's husband
along, sámmanas of accordant mind, sáṁsahasra accompanied by a thousand, sámokas of joint
abode. Examples of others are: átyūrmi surging over, ádhivastra having a garment on,
ádhyardha with a half over , ádhyakṣa overseer, ápodaka without water, abhírūpa

of adapted character, ávatoka that has aborted, ā́manas of favorable mind, údojas of exalted
power, nímanyu of assuaged fury, nírmāya free from guile, nírhasta handless.
b. In a comparatively small number of cases, the accent is otherwise, and generally on the
final: thus, avakeçá, upamanyú, viçaphá, viçikhá (AV. víçikha) , vikarṇá, saṁmātṛ́, etc.; in an
instance or two, that of the final member: thus, samçíçvarī having a common young.
1306. Possessive compounds with an ordinary adverb as prior member are also found in
every period of the language. They usually have the accent which belongs to the adverb as
independent word.
a. Examples are: ántyūti bringing near help, avódeva calling down the gods, itáūti helping
on this side, ihácitta with mind directed hither, dakṣiṇatáskaparda wearing the braid on the
right side, nā́nādharman of various character, purudhápratīka of manifold aspect, viçvátomukha
with faces on all sides , sadyáūti of immediate aid, víṣurūpa of various form, smádūdhan with
udder, adhástāllakṣman with mark below, ekatomukha with face on one side, táthāvidha of such
sort.
b. An instance or two of irregular accent are met with: thus, purorathá whose chariot is
foremost, evaṁkratú so-minded.
1307. a. It was pointed out in the preceding chapter (1222 h) that the indifferent suffix ka
is often added to a pure possessive compound, to help the conversion of the compounded stem
into an adjective; especially, where the final of the stem is less usual or manageable in
adjective inflection.
b. Also, the compound possessive stem occasionally takes further a possessive-making suffix:
thus, yaçobhagín, suçiprin, varavarṇin, dīrghasūtrin, puṇyavāgbuddhikarmin, sutásomavant,
tādṛgrūpavant, trayodaçadvīpavant, nārakapālakuṇḍalavant, amṛtabuddhimant.
c. The frequent changes which are undergone by the final of a stem occurring at the end of
a compound are noticed further on (1315).
1308. The possessive compounds are not always used in the later language with the simple
value of qualifying adjective; often they have a pregnant sense, and become the equivalents of
dependent clauses; or the having which is implied in them obtains virtually the value of our
having as sign of past time.
a. Thus, for example, prāptayāuvana possessing attained adolescence, i.e. having arrived at
adolescence; anadhigataçāstra with unstudied books, 
i. 
e. who has neglected study;
kṛtaprayatna 
possessing 
performed 
effort, 
i. 
e. on 
whom 
effort 
is 
expended;
an̄gulīyakadarçanāvasāna having the sight of the ring as termination , i. e. destined to end on
sight of the ring; uddhṛtaviṣādaçalyaḥ having an extracted despair-arrow, i. e. when I shall have
extracted the barb of despair; çrutavistāraḥ kriyatām let him be made with heard details , i. e.
let him be informed of the details; dṛṣṭavīryo me rāmaḥ Rāma has seen my prowess ,
bhagnabhāṇḍo dvijo yathā like

the Brahman that broke the pots , ukhānṛtam ṛṣiṁ yathā like a sage that has spoken falsely .
B. Compounds with Governed Final Member.
1309. Participial Compounds. This group of compounds, in which the prior member is a
present participle and the final member its object, is a small one (toward thirty examples), and
exclusively Vedic — indeed, almost limited to the oldest Vedic (of the Rig-Veda). The accent is
on the final syllable of the participle, whatever may have been the latter's accent as an
independent word.
a. Examples are: vidádvasu winning good things, kṣayádvīra governing (kṣáyant) heroes,
taráddvevas overcoming (tárant) foes, ābharádvasu bringing good things, codayánmati inciting
(codáyant) 
devotion, 
mandayátsakha 
rejoicing 
friends, 
dhārayátkavi 
sustaining 
sages,
maṅhayádrayi bestowing wealth.
b. In sādádyoni sitting in the lap  (sādat quite anomalously for sīdat or sadat), and
spṛhayádvarṇa emulous of color, the case-relation of the final member is other than accusative.
In patayán mandayátsakham (RV. i. 4. 7), patayát, with accent changed accordingly, represents
patayátsakham, the final member being understood from the following word. Vidádaçva is to be
inferred from its derivative vāídadaçvi. Of this formation appear to be jamádagni, pratádvasu
(prathád?), and trasádasyu (for trasáddasyu?). It was noticed above (1299 c) that yuyujānásapti
is capable of being understood as a unique compound of like character, with a perfect instead
of present participle; sā́dhadiṣṭi, on account of its accent, is probably possessive.
1310. Prepositional Compounds. By this name may be conveniently called those combinations
in which the prior member is a particle having true prepositional value, and the final member
is a noun governed by it. Such combinations, though few in number as compared with other
classes of compounds, are not rare, either in the earlier language or in the later. Their accent
is so various that no rule can be set up respecting it.
a. Examples are: átyavi passing through the wool, atirātrá overnight, atimātrá exceeding
measure; ádhiratha lying on the chariot , adhigavá belonging to the cow; adhaspadá under the
feet, adhoakṣa below the axle; ánupatha following the road, anupūrvá following the one
preceding, one after another, anuṣatyá in accordance with truth , anukū́la down stream, etc.;
ántaspatha (with anomalously changed accent of antár), within the way, antardāvá within the
flame (?), antarhastá in the hand; ántigṛha near the house; apiprā́ṇa accompanying the breath
(prāṇá) , ápivrata concerned with the ceremony , apiçarvará bordering on night, apikarṇá next
the ear; abhijñú reaching to the knee, abhívīra and abhísatvan overcoming heroes; ā́pathi on
the road, ā́deva going to the gods, ājarasá

reaching old age, ādvādaçá up to twelve; upakakṣá reaching to the armpits , upottamá next to
last, penultimate; upáribudhna above the bottom, upárimartya rising above mortals; tirojaná
beyond people; niḥsālá cut of the house; paripád (about the feet) snare , parihastá about the
hand, bracelet; parókṣa out of sight, parómātra beyond measure, parogavyūtí beyond the fields,
paraḥsahasrá (páraḥsahasra, ÇB.) above a thousand; purokṣá in front of the eyes;  pratidosá
toward evening, pratilomá against the grain, pratikū́la up stream, pratyákṣa before the eyes;
bahiḥparidhí outside the enclosure; vípathi outside the road; samakṣá close to the eyes, in sight .
b. Compounds of this character are in the later language especially common with adhi: thus,
adhyātma relating to the soul or self , adhiyajña relating to the sacrifice, etc.
c. A suffixal a is sometimes added to a final consonant, as in upānasá on the wagon, āvyuṣá
until daybreak. In a few instances, the suffix ya is taken (see above, 1212 m); and in one word
the suffix in: thus, paripantín besetting the path.
d. The prepositional compounds are especially liable to adverbial use: see below, 1313 b.
Adjective Compounds as Nouns and as Adverbs.
1311. Compound adjectives, like simple ones, are freely used substantively as abstracts and
collectives, especially in the neuter, less often in the feminine; and they are also much used
adverbially, especially in the accusative neuter.
a. The matter is entitled to special notice only because certain forms of combination have
become of special frequency in these uses, and because the Hindu grammarians have made out
of them distinct classes of compounds, with separate names. There is nothing in the older
language which by its own merits would call for particular remark under this head.
1312. The substantively used compounds having a numeral as prior member, along with, in
part, the adjective compounds themselves, are treated by the Hindus as a separate class, called
dvigu.
a. The name is a sample of the class, and means of two cows, said to be used in the sense
of worth two cows; as also pañcagu bought for five cows , dvināu worth two ships, páñcakapāla
made in five cups, and so on.
b. Vedic examples of numeral abstracts and collectives are: dvirājá [combat] of two kings,
triyugá three ages, triyojaná space of three leagues , tridivá the triple heaven, pañcayojaná
space of five leagues , ṣaḍahá six days' time, daçān̄gulá ten fingers' breadth; and, with suffix ya,
sahasrāhṇyá thousand days' journey. Others, not numeral, but essentially of the same character,
are, for example: anamitrá freedom from enemies, nikilbiṣá freedom from guilt, savidyutá
thunderstorm, víhṛdaya heartlessness, and

sáhṛdaya heartiness, sudivá prosperity by day, sumṛgá and suçakuná prosperity with beasts and
birds. Feminines of like use are not quotable from RV. or AV.; later occur such as triçatī three
hundred (481), trilokī the three worlds, pañcamūlī aggregate of five roots .
c. As the examples show, the accent of words thus used is various; but it is more
prevailingly on the final syllable than in the adjective compounds in their ordinary use.
1313. Those adverbially used accusatives of secondary adjective compounds which have an
indeclinable or particle as prior member are reckoned by the Hindu grammarians as a separate
class of compounds, and called by the name avyayībhāva.
a. This term is a derivative from the compound verb (1094) made up of avyaya uninflected
and √bhū, and means conversion to an indeclinable.
b. The prepositional compounds (1310) are especially frequent in this use: thus, for example,
anuṣvadhám by one's own will, abhipūrvám and parovarám in succession, ādvādaçám up to
twelve, pratidoṣám at evening, samakṣám in sight. Instances given by the grammarians are:
adhihari upon Hari, uparājam with the king, upanadam or upanadi near the river, pratyagni
toward the fire, pratiniçam every night, nirmakṣikam with freedom from flies.
c. A large and important class is made up of words having a relative adverb, especially
yathā, as prior member. Thus, for example, yathāvaçám as one chooses (váça will), yathākṛtám
as done [before], according to usage , yathānāmá by name, yathābhāgám according to several
portion, yathān̄gám and yathāparú limb by limb, yatrakā́mam whither one will, yāvanmātrám in
some measure, yāvajjīvám as long as one lives , yāvatsábandhu according to the number of
relations.
d. These compounds are not common in the old language; RV. has with yathā only four of
them, AV. only ten; and no such compound is used adjectively except yācchreṣṭha RV.,
yāvacchreṣṭhá AV. as good as possible . ÇB. has yathākārín, yathācārín, yáthākāma, yáthākratu
as adjectives (followed in each case by a correlative táthā). The adjective use in the later
language also is quite rare as compared with the adverbial.
e. 
Other 
cases 
than 
the 
accusative 
occasionally 
occur: 
thus, 
instrumental, 
as
yathāsaṁkhyena, yathāçaktyā, yathepsayā, yathāpratiguṇāis; and ablative, as yathāucityāt.
f. A class of adverbs of frequent occurrence is made with sa: e. g. sakopam angrily,
sādaram respectfully, sasmitam with a smile, saviçeṣam especially.
g. Other adverbial compounds of equivalent character occur earlier, and are common later:
for example, ṛtekarmám without work, nānārathám on different chariots , ubhayadyús two days
in succession, citrapadakramam with wonderful progress, pradānapūrvam with accompaniment
of a gift; etc.

Anomalous Compounds.
1314. As in every language, compounds are now and then met with which are of anomalous
character, as exhibiting combinations of elements not usually put together, or not after such a
method, or for such a purpose. Some of these, especially of those occurring in the old language,
may well be noticed here.
a. Compounds having a particle as final member: as, apratí having no equal, tuvipratí
mightily opposing, átathā refusing, vitatha false, yathātathá as it really is , súsaha prosperity in
companionship, aniha and anamutra having no here and no yonder, etc.
b. Agglomerations of two or more elements out of phrases: thus, ahampūrvá eager to be
first, ahamuttará contest for preeminence, mamasatyá contest for possession, itihāsá legend (iti
hā ”sa thus, indeed, it was ), naghamārá and naghāriṣá not, surely, dying or coming to harm,
kuvítsa some unknown person, tadídartha having just that as aim , kūcidarthín having errands in
every direction, kācitkará doing all sorts of things, kuhacidvíd wherever found, akutaçcidbhaya
out of all danger, yadbhaviṣya What-is-to-be, etc.
c. Agglomerations in which the prior member retains a syntactic form: as, anyonya and
paraspara one another, avaraspara inverted.
d. Aggregations with the natural order inverted: e. g. pitāmahá and tatāmahá grandfather,
putrahata with his sons slain , jānvākná and -jānvakta with bended knee, dantajāta provided
with teeth, somāpahṛtá deprived of soma, pan̄ktírādhas having groups of gifts, gojara old bull,
agrajihvá, agranāsikā, etc. tip of the tongue, of the nose, etc. Compare also 1291 c.
e. Aggregations of particles were pointed out above (1111 a); also (1122 e) cases in which
ná and mā́ are used in composition.
f. In late Sanskrit (perhaps after the false analogy of combinations like tad anu, viewed as
tadanu, with tad as stem instead of neuter accusative), a preposition is sometimes compounded
as final member with the noun governed by it: e. g. vṛkṣādhas or vṛkṣādhastāt under the tree,
dantāntaḥ between the teeth, bhavanopari on top of the house , satyavinā without truth.
Stem-finals altered in Composition.
1315. Transfers to an a-form of declension from other less common finals, which are not
rare in independent use, are especially common in the final members of compounds. Thus:
a. A stem in an often drops its final consonant (compare 429 a, 437): examples are akṣa,
adhva, arva, astha, aha, takṣa, brahma, mūrdha, rāja, loma, vṛṣa, çva, saktha, sāma.

b. An i or ī is changed to a: examples are an̄gula, an̄jala, açra, kukṣa, khāra, nada, nābha,
bhūma, rātra, sakha.
c. An a is added after a final consonant, and sometimes after an u-vowel or a diphthong
(compare 399): examples are ṛca, tvaca; uda, pada, çarada; apa; dhura, pura; ahna, açmana,
ūdhna, rājña; anasa, ayasa, āyuṣa, urasa, enasa, tamasa, manasa, yajuṣa, rajasa, rahasa, varcasa,
vedasa, çreyasa, sarasa; bhruva, diva, gava, gāva, nāva.
d. More sporadic and anomalous cases are such as: apanna-da (-dant) , pañca-ṣa (-ṣaṣ),
ajāika-pa (-pad), çata-bhiṣā (-bhiṣāj), vipaç-ci (-cit), yathā-pura (-puras).
Loose Construction with Compounds.
1316. In the looseness of unlimited and fortuitous combination, especially in the later
language, it is by no means rare that a word in composition has an independent word in the
sentence depending upon or qualifying it alone, rather than the compound of which it forms a
part.
a. Examples are: rāyáskāmo viçvāpsnyasya (RV.) desirous of all-enjoyable wealth;  aṇhór
urucákriḥ (RV.) causing relief from distress; mahādhané árbhe (RV.) in great contest and in
small; svāhāṁ çrāiṣṭhyakāmaḥ 
(AÇS.) desiring superiority over his fellows;  brāhmaṇāñ
chrutaçīlavṛttasampannān ekena vā (AGS.) Brahmans endowed with learning, character, and
behavior, or with one [of the three]; cittapramāthinī bālā devānām api  (MBh.) a girl disturbing
the minds even of the gods; vasiṣṭhavacanād ṛṣyaçṛn̄gasya co ’bhayoḥ (R.) at the words of both
Vasishtha and Rishyaçringa, sītādravyāpaharaṇe çastrāṇām āuṣadhasya ca 
(M.) in case of
stealing ploughing implements or weapons or medicament; jyotiṣām madhyacārī (H.) moving in
the midst of the stars; dārupātraṁ ca mṛnmayam (M.) a wooden and an earthen vessel;
syandane dattadṛṣṭiḥ (Ç.) with eye fixed on the chariot;  tasminn ullambitamṛtaḥ (KSS.) dead and
hanging upon it.

APPENDIX.
A. The following text is given (as proposed above, 3) in order to illustrate by an example
the variety of Sanskrit type in use. It is given twice over, and a transliteration into European
letters follows. The text is a fable extracted from the first book of the Hitopadeça.
The Hunter, Deer, Boar, and Jackal.

āsīt kalyāṇakaṭakavāstavyo bhāiravo nāma vyādhaḥ. sa cāi ’kadā māṅsalubdhaḥ san dhanur
ādāya vindhyāṭavīmadhyaṁ gataḥ. tatra tena mṛga eko vyāpāditaḥ. mṛgam ādāya gachatā tena
ghorākṛtiḥ sūkaro dṛṣṭaḥ. tatas tena mṛgam bhūmāu nidhāya sūkaraḥ çareṇa hataḥ. sūkareṇā ’py
āgatya pralayaghanaghoragarjanaṁ kṛtvā sa vyādho muṣkadeçe hataç chinnadruma iva papāta.
yataḥ:
jalam agniṁ viṣaṁ çastraṁ kṣudvyādhī patanaṁ gireḥ,
nimittaṁ kiṁcid āsādya dehī prāṇāir vimucyate.

atrāntare dīrgharāvo nāma jambukaḥ paribhramann āhārārthī tān mṛtān mṛgavyādhasūkarān
apaçyat. ālokyā ’cintayad asāu: aho bhāgyam. mahad bhojyaṁ samupasthitam. athavā:
acintitāni duḥkhāni yathāi ’va ”yānti dehinām,
sukhāny api tathā manye dāívam atrā ’tiricyate.
bhavatu; 
eṣām 
māṅsāir 
māsatrayaṁ 
samadhikam 
bhojanam 
me 
bhavisyati. 
tataḥ
prathamabubhuksāyāṁ tāvad imāni svādūni māṅsāni vihāya kodaṇḍāṭanīlagnaṁ snāyubandhaṁ
khādāmī ’ty uktvā tathā ’karot. tataç chinne snāyubandhe drutam utpatitena dhanuṣā hṛdi
bhinnaḥ sa dīrgharāvaḥ pañcatvaṁ gatah. ato ’ham bravīmi:
kartavyaḥ saṁcayo nityaṁ kartavyo nā ’tisaṁcayaḥ;
atisaṁcayadoṣeṇa dhanuṣā jambuko hataḥ.
B. The following text is given in order to illustrate by a sufficient example the usual method
of marking accent, as described above (87). In the manuscripts, the accent-signs are almost
invariably added in red ink. The text is a hymn extracted from the tenth or last book of the
Rig-Veda; it is regarded by the tradition as uttered by Vāc voice (i. e. the Word or Logos).
Hymn (X. 125) from the Rig-Veda.
अ॒हं ॒ेिभ॒वसु॑िभरा॒हमा॑िद॒ै॒त िव॒दवैः ।
अ॒हं िम॒ाव॑ण॒ोभा बभ॒हम॒ाी अ॒हम॒िन॒ोभा ॥१॥
अ॒हं सोम॑माह॒नस िबभ॒हं ा॑रमु॒त पू॒षण॒ं भग॑म् ।
अ॒हं द॑धािम॒ वणं ह॒िव॑ते सु॒ा॒े३◌॒◌॑ यज॑मानाय सु॒ते ॥२॥
अ॒हं रा स॒ंगम॑न॒ी वसू॑नां िचिक॒तुष थ॒मा य॒िया॑नाम् ।
तां मा॑ द॒ेवा ॑दधुः पु॒ा भूरा॒ां भूयाव॒ेशय॑ीम् ॥३॥
मय॒ा सो अ॑मि॒ यो िव॒प॑ित॒ यः ाणित॒ य ई ृ॒णोु॒म् ।
अ॒म॒व॒ो मां त उप॑ ियि ु॒िध ु॑त ि॒वं त वदािम ॥४॥
अ॒हम॒ेव ॒यिम॒दं व॑दािम॒ जु द॒ेवेभ॒त मानु॑षेिभः ।
यं क॒ामय॒े तंत॑मु॒ं ॑णोिम तं ॒ाण॒ं तमृिष॒ं तं सु॑म॒ेधाम् ॥५॥
अ॒हं ॒ाय॒ धनु॒रा त॑नोिम ॒िष॒े शर॑व॒े ह॒वा उ॑ ।

अ॒हं जना॑य स॒मद णो॒हं ावा॑पृिथ॒वी आ ववेश ॥६॥
अ॒हं सु॑वे िप॒तर॑म मू॒धम॒ योनर॒१◌॒◌॑ः स॑मु॒े ।
तत॒ो िव त॒े भुव॒नानु॒ िव॒ोतामूं ां व॒णोप॑ ृशािम ॥७॥
अ॒हम॒ेव वात॑ इव॒  वा॑॒ारभ॑माण॒ा भुव॑नािन॒ िवा॑ ।
प॒रो िद॒वा प॒र ए॒ना पृ॑िथ॒ैताव॑ती मिह॒ना सं ब॑भूव ॥८॥
aháṁ rudrébhir vásubhiç carāmy ahám ādityāír utá viçvádevāiḥ, ahám mitrā́váruṇo ’bhā́
bibharmy ahám indrāgnī́ ahám açvíno ’bhā́. 1.
aháṁ sómam āhanásam bibharmy aháṁ tváṣṭāram utá pūṣáṇam bhágam, aháṁ dadhāmi
dráviṇaṁ havíṣmate suprāvyè yájamānāya sunvaté. 2.
aháṁ rā́ṣṭrī saṁgámanī vásūnāṁ cikitúṣī prathamā́ yajñíyānām, tā́m mā devā́vy àdadhuḥ
purutrā́ bhū́risthātrām bhū́ry āveçáyantīm. 3.
máyā só ánnam atti yó vipáçyati yáḥ prā́ṇiti yá īṁ çṛṇóty uktám, amantávo mā́ṁ tá úpa
kṁiyanti çrudhí çruta çraddhiváṁ te vadāmi. 4.
ahám evá svayám idáṁ vadāmi juṣṭaṁ devébhir utá mā́nuṣebhiḥ, yáṁ kāmáye táṁ-tam
ugráṁ kṛṇomi tám brahmā́ṇaṁ tám ṛ́ṣiṁ táṁ sumedhā́m. 5.
aháṁ rudrā́ya dhánur ā́ tanomi brahmadvíṣe çárave hántavā́ u, aháṁ jánāya samádaṁ
kṛṇomy aháṁ dyā́vāpṛthivī́ ā́ viveça. 6.
aháṁ suve pitáram asya mūrdhán máma yónir apsv àntáḥ samudré, táto ví tiṣṭhe bhúvanā́
’nu víçvo ’tā́ ’mū́ṁ dyā́ṁ varṣmáṇó ’pa spṛçāmi. 7.
ahám evá vā́ta iva prá vāmy ārábhamāṇā bhúvanāni víçvā, paró divā́ pará enā́ pṛthivyāí
’tā́vatī mahinā́ sám babhūva. 8.
C. On the next page is given, in systematic arrangement, a synopsis of all the modes and
tenses recognized as normally to be made from every root in its primary conjugation, for the
two common roots bhū be and kṛ make (only the precative middle and periphrastic future
middle are bracketed, as never really occurring). Added, in each case, are the most important
of the verbal nouns and adjectives, the only ones which it is needful to give as part of every
verb-system.

√bhū be.
Present-system.
Perfect-system.
Aorist-system.
Future-systems.
Active:
Indic.
bhávāmi
babhū́va
bhaviṣyā́mi
bhavitā́smi
Opt.
bháveyam
bhūyā́sam
Impv.
bhávāni
Pple.
bhávant
babhūvā́ṅs
bhaviṣyánt
Augm.-Pret.
ábhavam
ábhūvam
ábhaviṣyam
Middle:
Indic.
bháve
babhūvé
bhaviṣyé
[bhavitā́he]
Opt.
bháveya
[bhaviṣīyá]
Impv.
bhávāi
Pple.
bhávamāna
babhūvāná
bhaviṣyámāṇa
Augm.-Pret.
ábhave
ábhaviṣi
Pass. pple bhūtá; — Infin. bhávitum; — Gerunds bhūtvā́, -bhū́ya.
√kṛ make.
Active:
Indic.
karómi
cakā́ra
kariṣyā́mi
kartā́smi
Opt.
kuryā́m
kriyā́sam
Impv.
karávāṇi
Pple.
kurvánt
cakṛvā́ṅs
kariṣyánt
Augm.-Pret.
ákaravam
ákārṣam
ákariṣyam
Middle:
Indic.
kurvé
cakré
kariṣyé
[kartā́he]
Opt.
kurvīyá
[kṛṣīyá]
Impv.
karávāi
Pple.
kurvāṇá
cakrāṇá
kariṣyámāṇa
Augm.-Pret.
ákurvi
ákṛṣi
Pass.pple kṛtá; — Infin. kártum; — Gerunds kṛtvā́, -kṛ́tya.

SANSKRIT INDEX.
The references in both Indexes are to paragraphs. In this one, many abbreviations are used; but
it is believed that they will be found self-explaining. For example, "pron." is pronunciation;
"euph." points out anything relating to phonetic form or euphonic combination; "pres.", to
present-system; "int." is intensive; "des." is desiderative; and so on. A prefixed hyphen denotes a
suffix; one appended, a prefix.
a, pron. etc., 19–22, combination with following vowel, 126, 127; loss of initial after e and o,
135, 175 a; resulting accent, 135 a; not liable to guṇa, 235 a; lightened to i or u, 249; lost in
weakened syllable, 253.
a, as union-vowel in tense-inflection, 621 c, 631.
-a, primy, 1148; scdry, 1208, 1209; -a in -aka, 1181; — a-stems, dcln, 326–34; from rdcl ā-
st., 333, 354; in compsn, 1270, 1287 a.
a- or an-, negative, 1121 a–c; in compsn, 1283 ff., 1288 a, 1304 a, b.
-aka, prmy, 1181; aka-stems sometimes govern accus., 271 c; scdry, 1222 j, k.
-aki, see 1221 b.
√akṣ, pf., 788.
akṣara, 8.
akṣán, ákṣi, 343 f, 431.
aghoṣa, 34 b.
√ac or añc, pf., 788 b; pple, 956 b, 967 c; stems ending with, 407–10.
-aj, 219 a, 383 k. 5.
√añc, see ac.
√añj, euph., 219 a; pres., 694, 687; pf., 788; tvā-ger'd, 991 d.
-aṇḍa, 1201 a.
-at, 383 k. 3 — and see -ant.
-ata, see 1176 e.
-ati, see 1157 g.
-atu, see 1161 d.
-atnu, see 1196 c.

-atra, see 1185 e.
-atha, see 1163 c.
-athu, see 1164.
√ad, impf., 621 c; caus., 1042 g.
-ad, 383 k. 4.
adhi, loss of initial, 1087 a.
adhika, in odd numbers, 477 a, 478 b.
√an, euph., 192 b; pres., 631.
-an, 1160.
an-, see a-.
-ana, 1150; stems in compan, 1271, 1296 b.
anaḍváh, euph., 224 b; dcln, 404.
-anā, 1150.
-ani, 1159.
-anī, 1150.
-anīya, 962, 965, 1215 b.
anu, changed to ānu after an-, 1087 b.
-anu, see 1162 c.
anudātta, 81.
anudāttatara, 90 c.
anunāsika, 36 a, 73 a.
anuvrata, with accus., 272.
anuṣṭúbh, euph., 151 d.
anusvāra, pron. etc., 70–3; transliteration, 73 c.
anehás, dcln, 419.
-ant or -at, of pples, 534, 1172; their dcln, 443 ff.

-anta, 1209 d.
antaḥsthā, 31, 51 a.
antara, in compsn, 1302 i.
-anti, see 1221 c.
anyá, dcln, 523.
ap or āp, dcln, 151 e, 393.
api, loss of initial, 1087 a.
-abha, 1199.
abhinihita-circumflex, 84 e.
√am, pres., 634; aor., 862.
-am, infln. in, 970 a; gerund, 995.
-amā, see 1166 b.
-aye, infln. in, 970 f, 975 b.
-ara, see 1188 d.
arí, dcln, 343 g.
-aru, see 1192 a.
√arth, so-called, 104 b, 1056, 1067.
artha, in compsn, 1302 h.
aryamán, dcln, 426 a.
árvan, árvant, 455.
√arh, pres., 613; pf., 788; aor., 862; desid., 1029 b.
-ala, see 1189 b.
alpaprāṇa, 37 d.
√av, aor., 838, 908; pple, 954 e; inf., 968 e; ya-ger'd, 992 c.
ava, loss of initial, 1087 a.
-ava, see 1190 a.
avagraha, 16.
√avadhīr, so-called, 104 b.

avayáj, avayā́, 406.
avyayībhāva, 1111 d, 1313.
√aç attain, pf., 788; aor., 834 b, 837–9, 847; fut., 936 c; inf., 968 d.
√aç eat, pf., 803 a des., 1029 b, 1031; caus., 1042 n.
√as be, pres., 636, 621 e; pf., 800 m; in periphr. conjn, 1070–2, 1073 d; in ppial periphr.
phrases, 1075 d; in cmpd conjn, 1093, 1094.
√as throw, pres., 761 c ; aor., 847; pple, 956 e; inf., 968 c.
as final, euph. treatment of, 175; exceptional cases, 176.
-as, 1151; dcln of stems in, 411 ff,; as-stems in compsn, 1278, 1296 b, 1298 b.
-as, infln. in, 970 a, 971.
asán, ásṛj, 398, 432.
-asi, 1198.
ásṛj, euph., 219: and see asán.
-ase, infln. in, 970 c, 973 a.
asthán, ásthi, 343 i, 431.
-asna, see 1195 a.
-asnu, see 1994 d.
√ah say, pf., 801 a.
√ah connect (?), 788 a.
áhan, áhar, áhas, 430.
ā, pron. etc., 19, 22; combination of final, 126, 127; elision of initial, 135 d; vṛddhi of a, 236 ff.;
lightened to ī or i, 250; to a, 250 c; in pres, 661–6, 761 f, g; in aor., 884; in pple, 954 c; in
des., 1028 d.
ā́, with ablative, 293 c, 983 a.
-ā, 1149.
ā-stems, dcln, 347 ff.
-āka, see 1181 d.
-āku, see 1181 d.
-ātu, see 1161 d.
ātman, used reflexively, 514 a.

ātmane padam, 529.
ādi, ādika, ādya, in compsn, 1302 d.
-āna, in pples, 584, 1175; used instead of māna, 741 a, 752 e, 1043 f; -āna in other
derivatives, 1175 a.
-ānī, see 1223 b.
-ānu, see 1162 c.
ānunāsikya, 36 a.
√āp, 1087 f; pf., 783 d; aor., 847, 862; des., 1030.
ābhā, in compsn, 1302 i.
ām, impv. 3d sing, in, 618.
āmreḍita, 1260 d.
-āyana, 1219.
-āyī, 1220.
-āyya, 966 c, 1051 f, 1218.
-āra, see 1188 d, 1226 b.
-āru, see 1192 a.
-āla, see 1227 a, 1245 l.
-ālu, see. 1192 b, 1227 b.
√ās, pres., 619 c, 628; inf., 968 d; periph. pf., 1071 c; in ppial periph. phrases, 1075 c.
ā́s, āsán, āsyà, 398 b, 432.
ās final, euph. treatment of, 177.
i, pron. etc., 19, 20, 22; i and y, 55; combinations of final, 126, 129, 797 f; with preceding a-
vowel, 127; from ya, 252, 784 c, 769, 922 b, 954 b; cases of loss before y, 233 a.
i, union-vowel, 254, 555 b; in pres., 630, 631, 634, 640; in pf., 796–8, 803; in aor., 876 b,
877; in fut., 934, 935, 943; in pple, 956; in infln., 968; in des., 1031.
i-stems, dcln, 335 ff.; from rdcl ī-st., 354; in compsn, 1276, 1287 c; sometimes govern
accus., 271 f.

√i go, pf., 783 b, 801 d; fut, 935 a; ya-ger'd, 992 a, c; int., 1002 e, 1021 b; caus., 1042 l; in
ppial periphr. phrases, 994 e, 1075 a; periphr. conj., 1071 f; irreg. comb. with prefixes, 1087 c;
in compd conjn, 1092 b.
√i (in, inv) send, 716 a.
-i, prmy, 1155; scdry, 1221.
-ika, prmy, 1186 c; scdry, 1222 j, l.
-ika, fem. to -aka, 1181 c, 1222 i.
√ich, 608 b, 753 b.
-ij, 219 a, 383 k. 5.
-it, 383 k. 3; advbl, 1109 a.
-ita, 1176 a, b, d.
íti, uses of, 1102 a–c; peculiar construction with, 268 b; abbrev'd to ti, 1102 d.
-iti, see 1157 g.
-itu, see 1161 c.
-itnu, see 1196.
-itra, see 1185 e.
√idh or indh, euph., 160 c; aor., 836, 837, 840 b.
√in (or inv), 699 b, 709, 716 a, 749 b.
-in, 1183, 1230; in-stems, dcln, 438 ff.; in compsn, 1275, 1287 e; sometimes govern accus.,
271 b; used participially, 960 b.
-ina, see 1177 b, 1209 c, 1223 f.
ínakṣa, 1029 c.
-ineya, see 1216 d.
√inv, see in.
-ibha, see 1199 a.
-ima, 1224 a.
-iman, see 1168 i–k.
iy in euph. comb'n from an i-vowel, a, e, d, 352 b.
-iya, 1214.
iyakva, 1029 c.

íyant, dcln, 451.
ir-stems, dcln, 392.
ira, see 1188 e, 1226 b.
irajya, iradha, 1021 a.
√il, caus., 1042 b.
-ila, see 1189 b, 1227 a.
iva, euph., 1102.
-iva, see 1190 a.
-ivas, see 1173 b.
√iṣ desire, pres., 608 b, 753 b; inf., 968 d; desid., 1029 b.
√iṣ send, caus., 1042 b.
-iṣa, see 1197 b.
-iṣṭha, 467–70, 1184.
-iṣṇu, 1194.
-is, 1153; is-stems, dcln, 411 ff.
ī, pron. etc., 19, 20, 22; combinations of final, 126, 129, 797 f; with preceding a-vowel, 127;
circumflexed, 128; uncombinable in dual etc., 138; ī as final of stem in verbal compsn, 1093,
1094.
ī, union-vowel, 254; in tense-inflection, 555 b, c; of pres., 632–4; of impf., 621, 631–4; of s-
aor., 880 b, 888–91; of int., 1004 ff.; ī for i, 900 b, 935 a, 968 d, f.
ī-stems, dcln, 347 ff.
-ī, 1156; to i before added sfx, 471 b, 1203 d, 1237 c, 1239 b; in compsn, 1249 d.
-īka, see 1186 c.
√īkṣ, aor., 862; desid., 1029b; periph. pf., 1071 c, 1073 a.
√īḍ, pres., 628, 630; pf., 783 d.
īta- for eta-forms in optative, 738 b, 771 d, 1032 a, 1043 c.
-īti, see 1157 g.
-ītu, see 1161 c.
-īna, prmy, see 1171 b; scdry, 1223 d.
-īman, see 1168 j.
īya, conj.-stem, 1021 b.

-īya, 1215.
-īyas, 467–70, 1184; stems in, dcln, 463 ff.
√īr, pres., 628; pf., 783 d, 801 d; pple, 957 b.
-īra, see 1188 e.
-īva, see 1190 a.
√īç, pres., 628, 630.
īçvara, with infin., 984, 987.
√īṣ, euph., 225 a.
-īṣa, see 1197.
√īh, euph., 240 b.
u, pron. etc., 19, 20, 22; u and v, 57; combinations of final, 126, 129; with preceding a-vowel,
127; from va, 252, 784, 769, 922 b, 954 b, 956 d; cases of loss before v, 233 a; final u gunated
in scdry derivation, 1203 a.
u-stems, dcln, 335 ff.; from rdcl ū-st, 354; desid. u-stems govern accus., 271 a.
-u, 1178; -u in -uka, 1180 a.
-uka, 1180; stems sometimes govern accus., 271 g.
ukṣán, dcln, 426 b.
√uch, 608 b, 753 b.
√ujh, periphr. pf., 1071 c.

√uñch, pres., 758.
uṇādi-suffixes, 1138 a.
-ut, 383 k. 3.
-utra, see 1185 e.
-utṛ, see 1182 b.
-utha, see 1163 d.
√ud or und, pres., 694 a, 758 a; pple, 957 d; desid., 1029 b.
úd, údaka, udán, 398 b, 432.
udātta, 81.
-una, see 1177 c.
-uni, see 1158 e.
upadhmānīya, 69.
√ubj, aor., 862.
√ubh or umbh, pres., 694, 758 a.
-ubha, see 1199 a.
ubháya, dcln, 525 c.
ur or us as 3d pl. ending, 169 b.
ur-stems, dcln, 392.
-ura, see 1188 f, 1226 b.
-uri, 1191 a.
-ula, see 1189 b, 1227 a.
uv in euph. comb'n from an u-vowel, 129 a, c, d, 352 b, 697 a.
uçánas, uçánā, dcln, 355 a, 416.
√uṣ, pres., 608 b; ya-ger'd, 992 b; periphr. pf., 1071 f.
-uṣa, see 1197 c.
uṣás, euph., 168 a; dcln, 415 b.
-uṣi, see 1221 c.
uṣṇíh, euph., 223 a.

-us, 1154; us-stems, dcln, 411 ff.
usṛ́, 371 j.
us or ur as 3d pl. ending, 169 b.
ū, pron. etc., 19, 20, 22; combinations of final, 126, 129, 797 f; with preceding a-vowel, 127;
circumflexed, 128; uncombinable in dual, 138 a.
ū-stems, dcln, 347 ff.
-ū, 1179.
-ūka, see 1180 f.
-ūtṛ, see 1182 b.
-ūtha, see 1163 d.
ū́dhan, ū́dhar, ū́dhas, 430 d.
ūna, in odd numbers, 477 a, 478 b.
-ūna, see 1177 c.
-ūra, see 1188 f.
ū́rj, euph., 219 a.
√ūrṇu, so-called, 104 b, 713; pf., 801 g, 1071 e; ya-ger'd, 992 c.
-ūṣa, see 1197 c.
ūṣman, 31, 59.
√ūh remove, infln., 968 c; ya-ger'd, 992 c.
√ūh consider, euph., 240 b, 745 a; pres., 894 d, 897 b.
ṛ, pron. etc., 23–6; objectionable pronunciation and transliteration as ṛi, 24 a; question of ṛ or
ar in roots and stems, 104 d, e, 237; combinations of final, 126, 129; with preceding a-vowel,
127; exceptions, 127 a; impedes change of preceding s to ṣ, 181 a; changes succeeding n to ṇ,
189 ff.; guṇa and vṛddhi increments of, 235 ff.; irregular changes, 241, 243; variable final ṛ of
roots (so-called ṝ), 242.
ṛ-roots, root-nouns from, 383 b, g.
ṛ-stems, dcln, 369 ff.
ṛ, variable (so-called ṝ), roots in, 242, 245 b; their passive, 770 c; aor., 885, 900 b; prec.,
922 a; fut., 935 a; pple, 957 b; root-infln., 971; gerund in ya, 992 a.
√ṛ, euph., 242 c; pres., 608 a, 699 a, 753 b, 643 d, 645, 716 a; passive, 770 c; pf., 783 a;
aor., 834 a, 837 b, 840 b, 847, 853, 862; pple, 957 b; int, 1002 e; caus., 1042 i; caus. aor.,
1047.

-ṛ, see 1182 h.
ṛi, ṛī, bad transliterations for ṛ, ṝ, 24 a.
√ṛc or arc, pf., 788 a; aor., 862, 894 d, 897 b; ya-ger'd, 992 b.
√ṛch, 608, 753 b; pf., 788 b.
-ṛj, 383 k. 5.
√ṛñj or ṛj or arj stretch out, pres., 758 a; pf., 788 b; aor., 894 d, 897 b.
√ṛṇv, 716 a.
-ṛt, 383 k. 3.
ṛtvíj, euph., 219.
√ṛd, pple, 957 d.
√ṛdh, pres., 694; pf., 788 a; aor., 832, 837, 838, 840 a, 847, 862; des., 1029 b, 1030.
ṛbhukṣan, dcln, 434.
√ṛṣ, pf., 788 b.
ṛhánt, dcln, 450 e.
ṝ, pron. and occurrence, 23–6; objectionable pronunciation and transliteration as ṛī, 24 a; as
alleged final of roots, 104 d, 242 (and see ṛ, variable); changes succeeding n to ṇ, 189 ff.

ḷ, pron. and occurrence, 23–6; objectionable pronunciation and transliteration as ḷi or ḷri, 24
a; its guṇa-increment, 236.
ḷi, ḷri, bad transliterations for ḷ, 24 a.
ḹ, 23 a.
e, pron. etc., 27–9; combinations of final, 131–3, 135; with final a-vowel, 127; uncombinable in
dual etc., 138 a, b, f; guṇa of i and ī, 235 ff.; from radical ā, 250 d; as alleged final of roots,
251, 761 f.
e, infln. in, 970 a, 971.
éka, dcln, 482 a, b; used as article, 482 c; in making 9's 477 a, b.
ekaçruti, 90 c.
√edh, pf., 790 c; desid., 1029 b, 1031 b; periph. pf., 1071 c.
-ena, 1223 e.
-enya, 966 b, 1038, 1217.
-eya, 1216.
-eyya, 1216 e.
-era, see 1201 a, 1226 b.
-eru, see 1192 a.
-elima, 966 d, 1201 a.
eṣás, euph., 176 a.
āi, pron. etc., 27–9; combination with final a-vowel, 127; as final, 131–3; vṛddhi of i and ī, 235
ff.; as alleged final of roots, 251, 761 e; for union-vowel ī in tense-inflection, 555 c; for e in
subj. endings, 561 a.
āi as gen.-abl. ending, 365 d.
o, pron. etc., 27–9; combination with final a-vowel, 127; as final, 131, 132, 134, 135; before
suffix ya, 136 b; uncombinable, 138 c, f; for final as, 175, 176; ar, 179 a; guṇa of u and ū, 235
ff.; as alleged final of roots, 251, 761 g.
oṁ, euph., 137 b.
-otṛ, see 1182 b.
odana, euph., 137 b.

-ora, see 1201 a.
oṣṭha, euph., 137 b.
oṣṭhya, 49.
āu, pron. etc., 27–9 ; combination with final a-vowel, 127; as final, 131, 132, 134 b; vṛddhi of u
and ū, 235 ff.
ḥ, pron. etc., 67–9; makes heavy syllable, 79; occurrence as final, 148, 170 a; for the labial and
guttural spirants, 170 d; from finals, 145, 170 a, 172; from r, 144, 178; allows change of s to ṣ,
183.
ṅ or ṁ, pron. etc., 70–3; makes heavy syllable, 79; occurrence as final, 148; allows change of s
to ṣ, 183; occurrence, 204, 212, 213 e.
k, pron. etc., 39, 40; relation to c, 42; to ç, 64; s to ṣ after, 180 ff.; added to final n̄, 211; from
c, by reversion, 214 ff.; as final, and in internal combination, 142, 217; from ç, do., 145, 218;
from ṣ, 226 e; anomalously from t, 151 a; to t, 151 c.
-ka, prmy, 1186; scdry, 1222; ka in -uka, 1180 a; in -aka, 1181.
-kaṭa, see 1245 k.
kaṇṭhya guttural, 39.
√kan, pf., 786 e; aor., 899 d.
√kath, so-called, 1056.
√kam, aor., 868; pple, 955 a.
kampa, 78 d, 87 d, 90 ff.
kámvant, euph., 212.
-kara, 1201 a.
karmadhāraya, 1263 a.
√kal, caus., 1042 g.
kalpa in compsn, 1302 i.
√kas, pple, 956 b.
√kā, int. (?), 1013 b.
kāma, with accus., 272; in compsn with infin.-stem, 968 g.
kāmya as denom.-sign, 1066.
kāra, in sound-names, 18.

√kāç, int., 1017.
√kās, periph. pf., 1071 f.
kíyant, dcln, 451.
√kir, 756.
√kīrt or kṝt, so-called, 1056.
√ku, pres., 633.
√kuc, caus., 1042 h.
√kup, pres., 761 a; aor., 840b; pple, 956 b.
√kumār, so-called, 104 b.
kuvíd, accent of verb with, 595 e.
√kṛ make, pres., 714, 716, 855 a; pf. 797 c, 800 k; aor. 831, 834 a–40, 847, 894 d; int,
1002 g, h; prefixes s, 1087 d; in periph. conjn, 1070–3; in compd conjn, 1091–4; special
constructions, 268 a.

√kṛ, kir scatter, 242 b; pres., 756; aor., 885; prefixes s, 1087 d.
√kṛ commemorate, int, 1002 d, 1019 b.
√kṛt cut, pres., 758; aor., 847, 852 a; fut., 935 b.
-kṛt, see 1105.
kṛt-suffixes, 1138 a.
-kṛtvas, see 1105.
√kṛp, pres., 745 b; aor., 834 b; cans., 1042 b.
kṛçá as pple, 958.
√kṛṣ, 102 a; euph., 226 f; pf. 790 c; aor., 916 a, 920 a; fut., 935 d, 936 d; inf., 968 d.
√kḷp, 26; pf., 786 a; fut., 935 b, 936 d.
-knī, see 1176 d.
√knū, caus., 1042 l.
√krand, pf., 794 d; aor., 847, 861 a, 890 b; int., 1002 g, h, 1017.
√kram, pres., 745 d; aor., 833, 847, 899 d, 904 a; fut. 935 b; pple, 955 a; inf., 968 d; tvā-
ger'd, 991 b; des., 1031 b; caus., 1042 g; in periphr. conj., 1070 c.
√krī, caus., 1042 l.
√krīḍ, caus., 1042 n.
√krudh, aor., 847.
√kruç, aor., 916 a, 920 a.
króṣṭu, kroṣṭṛ́, 343 k, 374.
√klam, pres., 745 d, 761 a, 763; pple, 955 a.
√klid, pple, 957 d.
√kliç, aor., 916 a.
kṣ, combinations of, 146, 221.
√kṣan, pple, 954 d; inf., 968 e.
√kṣam, pres., 763; fut., 935 b; pple, 955 a, 956 b; inf., 968 d; caus., 1042 g.
kṣám, dcln, 388.
√kṣar, aor., 890.
√kṣal, caus., 1042 n.

√kṣā, pres., 761 e; pple, 957 a.
kṣāma as pple, 958.
√kṣi possess, pres., 755; caus., 1042 d, l.
√kṣi destroy, pres., 761 b; fut, 935 a; pple, 957 a; ya-ger'd, 922 a; caus., 1042 l.
√kṣud, pple, 957 d.
√kṣudh, pres., 761 a; aor., 847.
√kṣubh, pple, 956 b.
kṣāipra-circumflex, 84 a.
√kṣṇu, pres., 626.
√kṣvid, pple, 957 d.
kh, pron. etc., 39; relation to ṣ, 61 b.
√khan or khā, 102 a; pass., 772; pf., 794 e; aor., 890 a; pple, 955 b; inf., 968 e; ya-ger'd,
992 a; caus., 1042 g.
√khā, 102 a.
√khid, pf., 790 b; pple, 957 d.
√khud, khun, int., 1002 g, h.
√khyā, aor., 847, 894 c; fut, 936 c.
g, pron. etc., 39; relation to j, 42; from j by reversion, 214 ff.
gata, in compsn, 1273 c.
√gam, 102 a; pres., 608 b, 747, 855 a; aor., 833, 834b, 837–40, 847, 881 e, 887 b; pf., 794
e, 805 a; fut, 943 a; pple, 954 d; int., 1002 g, h, 1003; des., 1028 e, 1031 b; caus., 1042 g;
root-noun, 383 h.
√gal, int., 1002 d.
√gā go, 102 a; pres., 660; aor., 830, 836, 839, 884, 894 c; desid., 1028 d.
√gā sing, 251; pres., 761 e; aor., 894 d, 912; pple, 954 c; inf., 968 f; ya-ger'd, 992 a; caus.,
1042 j, k.
√gāh or gah, pple, 956 e; int., 1002 d.
√gir, gil, 756; caus., 1042 b.
√gu, int., 1002 d.
guṇa, 27, 235 ff.

√gup, aor., 863 a; inf., 968 c; ya-ger'd, 992 c; des., 1040.
√gur, pres., 756; aor., 834 a; pple, 957 b.
√guh, euph., 155 b, d, 223 b, 240 c; pres., 745 c; pf., 793 i; aor., 847, 852, 916 a, 920 a, f;
inf., 968 e; ya-ger'd, 992 c; caus., 1042 b.
√gṛ sing, euph., 242 b; aor., 894 d.
√gṛ swallow, euph., 242 b; pres., 756; aor., 836; inf., 968 d; int., 1002 d.
√gṛ (or jāgṛ) wake, 1020; aor., 867, 871.
√gṛdh, pf., 786 a; aor., 847.
gó, euph., 134 a, 236 b; dcln, 361 c, f.
gdha, gdhi, 233 f.
√grath or granth, pres., 730 a; pf., 794 h; caus., 1042 h.
√grabh or grah, euph., 155 b, 223 g; pres., 723, 729, 731, 732, 904 d, 1066 b; pf., 794 c,
801 i; aor., 834 b, 847, 900 b, 904 a, b; fut. 936 e; pple, 956 d, e; infin., 968 f; pass., 998 f;
des., 1031 b; caus., 1042 b.
√gras, pple, 956 b.

√glā, pres., 761 e; aor., 912; pple, 957 a; caus., 1042 j.
glāú, dcln, 361 a.
gh, pron. etc., 30; h derived from, 66; from h, by reversion, 214 ff., 402.
√ghaṭ, caus., 1042 g.
√ghas, euph., 167, 233 f; jakṣ from, 640; pf., 794 d; aor., 833, 847; pple, 954 e.
ghoṣavant, 34.
√ghrā, pres., 671, 749 a; tvā-ger'd, 991 d; ya-ger'd, 992 c; caus., 1042 d.
n̄, pron. etc., 39; occurrence as final, 143, 386. 2, 3, 407 a; duplication as final, 210; adds k
before sibilant, 211.
c, pron. etc., 42–4; as final, 142; from t before a palatal, 202 a, 203; n to ñ before it, 208 b ;
internal combinations of, 217; reversion to k, 216 ff.; in pres., 681; pf., 787; int., 1002 i; des.,
1028 f.
√cakās or cakāç, so-called, 677.
√cakṣ, pres., 444 a, 621 a, 628, 675.
catúr, dcln, 482 g, h.
√cam, pres., 745 d; pple, 955 a; caus., 1042 g.
√car, euph., 242 d; aor., 899 d; pple, 957 b; inf., 968 c; tvā-ger'd, 991 b, c; int., 1002 d,
1003, 1017; des., 1031 b; in ppial periphr. phrases, 1075 b.
√carv, pple, 956 a, 957 b.
√cal, int., 1003; caus., 1042 g.
√cāy, pres., 761 e; tvā-ger'd, 991 c; ya-ger'd, 992 b; periphr. pf., 1071 f.
√ci gather, reversion of c to k, 216 l, 681, 787, 1028 f; pres., 716 b, 855 a; aor., 889; tvā-
ger'd, 991 d; ya-ger'd, 992 a; caus., 1042 l.
√ci note, pres., 645; aor., 834 a.
√cit, reversion of c to k, 216 l, 681, 787, 1002 i, 1028 f; pf., 790 b, 801 e; aor., 840 a, b;
int., 1002 i, 1024; des., 1040; caus., 1042 b.
√ceṣṭ pf., 790 c.
√cyu, pf., 785 a; aor., 840 b, 866, 867, 868 a, 870; inf., 968 c; caus., 1042 e.

ch, pron. etc., 42, 44; as final, 142; from ç after t or n, 203; after other mutes, 203 a; in
internal combination, 220; duplication between vowels, 227; çch for, 227 a.
cha present-stems, 608.
√chad, pple, 957 d.
√chand, aor., 863 a, 890 b; caus., 1042 g.
√chā, pres., 753 c; pple, 954 c; tvā-ger'd, 991 b; caus., 1042 k.
√chid, pres., 694 a; pf., 805 b; aor., 832 a, 834 d, 847, 887 a; pple, 957 d.
√chur, caus., 1042 b.
√chṛd, pple, 957 d; tvā-ger'd, 991 d.
j, pron. etc., 42–4; as final, 142; in internal combination, 219; n to ñ before it, 202 b; from t
before sonant palatal, 202 a; reversion to g, 215 ff.; in pf., 787; in des., 1028 f.; before na of
pple, 957 c; anomalously changed to d, 151 c.
√jakṣ, 102 a; euph., 233 f; pres., 640, 675; pple, 954 e.
jágat, dcln, 450 d.
jagdha etc., 233 f.
√jan, 102 a; pres., 631 a, 645, 680, 761 b, 772; pf., 794 e; aor., 834 b, 904 d; pple, 955 b;
inf., 968 e; des., 1031 b.
jáni, dcln, 343 f.
janús, dcln, 415 c.
√jap, pple, 956 b; int., 1002 d, 1017.
√jambh or jabh, inf., 968 e; int., 1017.
√jalp, pf., 790 c.
√jas, aor., 871.
√jā, 102 a.
√jāgṛ, so-called, 104 b, 1020; pf., 1071 e.
jātya-circumflex, 84 b.
√ji conquer, reversion of j to g, 216 l; in pf., 787; in des., 1028 f; aor., 839, 889, 894 b, 904
b; fut., 935 a; caus., 1042 l; caus. aor., 1047, 861 b; periph. pf., 1071 f.
√ji injure — see jyā.
√jinv, 716 a, 749 b.
jihvāmūlīya, 39 a, 69.

√jiv, aor., 861 a ; des., 1028 h, 1031 b; caus., 1042 n.
√jur, pres., 756, 766.
√juṣ, aor., 834 b, 836, 840 b; in sajū́s, 225 a, 392 b.
√jū, pres., 728; pf., 786 c.

√jṛ waste away, euph., 216 l, 242 b; pres., 756, 766; pf., 793 h, 794 k; pple, 957 b; caus., 1042
e.
√jñā, pres.,730b, 731; pf., 790 b; aor., 830, 838, 894 c, 912; caus., 1042 j; caus. aor., 1047,
861 b; caus. des., 1030; caus. pple, 1051 b.
√jyā or jī, pres., 761 b; pf., 785 a, 794 b; aor., 912; pple, 954 c.
√jri, aor., 897 b.
√jval, aor., 899 d; caus., 1042 g.
jh, pron. and occurrence, 42; as final, 142; in internal combination, 220 b.
ñ, pron. etc., 42; from n after a palatal, 201; before j, 202 b; ç, 203; c, 208 b.
ṭ, pron. etc., 45, 46; from a final palatal, 142; ç, 145, 218; ṣ, 145; h, 147; adds t before s, 199
e; added to final ṇ before sibilant, 211; from j in internal combination, 219; ch, 220; kṣ, 221; h,
222; ṣ, 226 b.
ṭh, pron. etc., 45, 46.
ḍ, pron. etc., 45; ordinary derivation, 46; ḷ used for, 5 a, 54; from d with preceding sibilant,
198 d, 199 d.
ḍh, pron. etc., 45, 46; ḷh used for, 54; from dh with preceding sibilant, 199 d; from h with
following t or th or dh, 222 b.
ḍhvam or dhvam, 226 c, 881 b, 901 a, 924 a.
ṇ, pron. etc., 45; ordinary derivation, 46; as final, 143; change of n to, 189–95; from n with
preceding sibilant, 199 b; doubled as final, 210; adds ṭ before a sibilant, 211.
t, pron. etc., 47, 48; from final radical s, 145; do. in internal combn, 167, 168; with preceding
sonant aspirate, 160; assim. to following l, 162; added after ṭ before s, 199 e; after n before s
or ṣ, 207; to palatal before palatal, 202; before ç, 203; anomalously changed to k, 151 a; to ṭ,
151 b; from k and j, 151 c.
-t, added after short final vowel of root, 345, 376 h, 383 f–h, 1143 d, 1147 d, 1196 a, 1213
a; irregular cases, 1147 e.
-ta, of pple, 952–6, 1176; ta-stems in compsn, 1273, 1284; scdry, 1245 e.

√taṅs or tas, pf., 794 d; aor., 847.
√takṣ, pres., 628; pf., 790 b; pple, 956 a.
√taḍ, euph., 198 c.
tatpuruṣa, 1263 a.
taddhita-suffixes, 1138 a.
√tan stretch, pass., 772; pf., 794 f, 805 a; aor., 833 a. 834 b, 847, 881 e, 890 a, 899 d;
pple, 954 d; ya-ger'd, 992 a; des., 1028 e.
-tana, 1245 g–i.
tanū as refl. pronoun, 514 b.
√tap, pres., 761 b ; aor., 834 d, 233 e, 865 a; fut, 935 b.
√tam, pres., 763; aor., 847; pple, 955 a; inf., 968 e.
-tama, 471–3, 487 f, g, 1242 a, b.
-tamam and -tāmam, 1111 e, 1119.
-taya, 1245 a.
-taye, infin. in, 970 e, 975.
-tar, see 1109 a, and -tṛ.
-tara, 471–3, 1242 a, b.
-taram and tarām, 1111 e, 1119.
-tari, infln. in, 970 i, 979.
-tavant, pple in, 959, 960.
-tave and tavāi, infln. in, 970 b, 972.
-tavya, 962, 964, 1212 i.
√tas, see taṅs.
-tas, 1152; advbl, 1098.
-tā, 1237.
-tāt, impv. forms in, 570, 571, 618, 654, 704, 723, 740, 752 c, 760 c, 839, 1011 a, 1032a,
1043 d.
-tāt, 383 k, 1238; advbl, 1100 b.
-tāti, 1238.
√tāy, pres., 761 e; periphr. pf., 1071 f.
tālavya, 44 a.

-ti, 1157; ti-stems in compsn, 1274, 1287 d; scdry, 519, 1157 h; advbl, 1102 a–d.
√tij, euph., 219 a; des., 1040.
-titha, 1242 e.
√tir, 756, 766.
√tu, pres., 633; pf., 786 c; aor., 868 a; int., 1002 g.
-tu, 1161, 970 b, 972.
√tuj, caus., 1042 b.
√tud, pres., 758; pple, 957 d.

-tum, infin. in, 968, 970 b, 972, 987, 988.
√tur, pres., 756, 766; des., 1029 a; caus., 1042 b.
-tur, 1182 g.
√tul, caus., 1042 b.
√tuṣ, caus., 1042 b.
√tṛ, euph., 242 b; pres., 709, 715 c, 756, 766; pf., 794 k, 801 f, 804; aor., 904 d; pple, 957
b; inf., 968 d; ya-ger'd, 992 a; int, 1002 d, g, 1003, 1017; desid., 1029 a.
-tṛ, 943, 1182; tṛ-stems, dcln, 369 ff.; govern accus., 271 d; verbal use of, 946; make
periphr. fut, 942–7.
tṛca, euph., 233 a.
tṛta, tṛtīya, euph., 243.
√tṛd, aor., 836 b, 837 a; pple, 957 d.
√tṛp, pres., 710, 758; pf., 786 a; fut., 936 d; aor., 847, 852 a.
√tṛṣ, pf., 786 a; aor., 840 b, 847
√tṛh or tṛṅh, euph., 223 b, 224 b; pres., 694 a, 695; aor., 847, 916 a.
toçás, dcln, 415 b.
-tos, infln. in, 970 b, 972.
tta for dāta, 955 f, 1087 e.
tti for dāti, 1157 c.
-tna, 1245 g, h.
-tnu, 1196.
tman, dcln, 426 b.
-tya, for -ya, 992; scdry, 1245 b–d.
√tyaj, 1087 f; euph., 219 a; pf., 785 a; fut. 935 b; pple, 956 b.
-tyāi, infln. in, 970 e, 975 a.
-tra, 1185; or trā, advbl, 1099.
√trap, pf., 794 h.
√tras, pf., 794 h; aor., 899 d.
√trā, 102 a; pres., 628; aor., 887 d, 893 a, 895.

-trā, see -tra.
tri, dcln, 482 e, f; in compsn, 1300 c.
-tri, see 1185 g.
triṣṭúbh, euph., 151 d.
-trī, 376 c, 1182.
-tru, see 1185 g.
-tva, gerundival, 966 a, 1209 h; scdry, 1239.
-tvatā, 1239 d.
-tvan, see 1169.
-tvana, 1240.
√tvar, caus., 1042 g.
-tvara, see 1171.
-tvā, 990, 991, 993.
-tvānam, 993 c.
-tvāya, 993 b.
√tviṣ, pres., 621 a; aor., 916 a.
-tvī, 993 b.
-tvīnam, 993 c.
√tsar, aor., 890 a, 899 d.
th, pron. etc., 47, 48; with preceding sonant aspirate, 160.
-tha, 1163; ordinal, 487 c, 1242 d; or thā, advbl, 1101.
-tham, advbl, see 1101 a.
-thā, see tha.
-thāt, advbl, 1101 a.
-thu, 1164.
d, pron. etc., 47, 48; anomalously changed to ḍ, 151 b; do. from h, 404.
dákṣina, dcln, 525 c.
√dagh, euph., 155 b, 160 c; aor., 833, 836 b, 838, 847.
√dad, 672; pf., 794 j.

√dadh, 672; euph., 155 e, 160 c.
dadhán, dádhi, 343 i, 431.
dán, euph., 389 b.
dánt, dcln, 396.
dantya, 47.
√dabh or dambh, euph., 155 b; pf., 794 h; aor., 833; des., 1030.
√dam, pres., 763; pple, 955 a; tvā-ger'd, 991 b.
-dam, advbl, see 1103 b.
√day, pres., 761 f; periph. pf., 1071 f.
√daridrā, so-called, 104b, 1024 a; pf., 1071 e.
√dal, caus., 1042 g.
√daç or daṅç, pres., 746; pf., 794 d; tvā-ger'd, 991 d.
√das, aor., 847, 852 b, 899 d.
√dah, euph., 155 b, d, 223 a; aor., 890 a, 897 a, 444 a; fut., 935 d; int, 1002 d; des., 1030.
√dā give, pres., 667–9, 672, 855 a; pf., 803 a; aor., 830, 834 a, 836, 837, 839, 847, 884,
894 c; pple, 955 f, 1087 e, 1157 c; inf., 968 f; tvā-ger'd, 991 b; ya-ger'd, 992 a; des., 1030,
1034 b.
√dā divide, 251; pres., 753 c, 761 g; aor., 834 a; pple, 954 c, 955 f, 957 a, 1087 e, 1157 c;
ya-ger'd, 992 a.
√dā bind, pres., 753 c, 761 g; aor., 884; pple, 954 c.
√dā protect, alleged, pf., 787.
-dā, advbl, 1103 a, b.
-dānīm, advbl, 1103 c.
√dāç, pres., 444, 639 c; pf., 790 b, 803 a.

√dās, pres., 444.
-di, advbl, 1103 e.
didyót etc., 336 e.
√div, see dīv.
dív, dcln, 361 d.
√diç, euph., 218 a; aor., 916, 920 a; int., 1017.
√dih, euph., 155 b, 223 a; aor., 916.
√dīkṣ, des., 1031 b; caus., 1042 n.
√dīdī, so-called, 676; pf., 786 b.
√dīdhī, so-called, 104 b, 676; pf., 786 b; aor., 897 b.
√dīp, aor., 861 a.
√dīv play, euph., 240 b; pres., 765; pple, 955 c; inf., 968 e.
√dīv or dev lament, pple, 957 a; inf., 968 e.
√du or dū, pres., 716 b; pple, 957 a.
ducchúnā, euph., 168 b.
√dudh, 102 a.
√duṣ, euph., 240 c, 1155 a; aor., 847; caus., 1042 b.
dus-, 225 a, 1121; in compsn, 1284 a, b, 1288 e, f, g, 1304 c, d.
√duh, euph., 165 b, d, f, 223 a; pres., 621, 635; pf., 801 h; aor., 916, 920 a f.
√dṛ pierce, euph., 242 c; pf., 793 h; pple, 957 b; int., 1002 d, 1003, 1023; caus., 1042 e.
√dṛ heed, pres., 757, 773; aor., 834 a, 881 b.
√dṛp, aor., 847; fut., 935 b, 936 d.
√dṛç, euph., 218 a; pf., 790 c, 801 e, 805 b; aor., 832, 834 b, 836, 840 b, 847, 890 a, 894
a; fut., 936 d; pass., 998 f; root-noun, dcln, 386. 3.
dṛç, dṛça, drkṣa, with pron.-stems, 518.
√dṛh or dṛúh, euph., 155 b, 223 b, d; pres., 758, 761 b, 767; pf., 786 a.
devanāgarī, 1.
doṣán, dós, 398 a. 432.
dyú and dyó, dcln, 361 d, e.

√dyut, pf., 785 a; aor., 840 a, b, 847, 863 a, 890 a; int., 1002 g; caus., 1042 b.
-dyus, see 1105 b.
√drā run, pple, 957 a; int., 1024 a.
√drā sleep, aor., 912; pple, 954 c, 957 a; int., 1024 a.
√dru, pf., 797 c; aor., 868; int., 1018 a; caus., 1042 e.
√druh, euph., 155 b, d, 223 a, c; aor., 834 d. 847, 920 e, f.
dvandva, 1252 a.
dvā́r, dcln, 388. 3.
dvi, cmpds with, 1300 c.
dvigu, 1312.
√dviṣ, euph., 226 d, f; pres., 621 a; aor., 916, 920 b.
dh, pron. etc., 47. 48; from t or th after sonant aspirate, 160; h from, 223 g.
-dha, see -dhā.
√dham or dhmā, pres., 760 ; pass., 772; aor., 912; pple, 955 b; ya-ger'd, 992 a.
√dhā put, euph., 223 g; pres., 667–9, 672, 856 a; aor., 830, 834–7, 839, 847, 884; pple, 954
c; inf., 968 f; tvā-ger'd, 991 b; des., 1028 d, 1030, 1031 a; in periphr. conj., 1070 c.
√dhā suck, 251; pres., 761 f; aor., 868; pple, 954 c; inf., 968 f; ya-ger'd, 992 a.
-dhā or -dha, advbl, 1104.
√dhāv rinse, pple dhāutá, 954 e.
√dhi (or dhinv), 716 a.
dhi, final of compds, 1155 g, 1276 b.
√dhū or dhu, pres., 712, 728 a, 755; pf., 790 b; aor., 868 a, 887 c; int., 1002 g, 1003, 1018
a; caus., 1042 m.
√dhūrv, aor., 887 c; des., 1028 h.
√dhṛ, pres., 767, 773; pf., 786 a; aor., 834 a, 867, 871; int., 1003.
√dhṛṣ, pf., 786 a; aor., 847, 852 b; pple, 956 b.
√dhmā, see dham.
√dhyā, pres., 761 e; aor., 912.
-dhyāi, infin. in, 970 g, 976, 1050 f.
√dhvaṅs or dhvas, euph., 168; pf., 790 c; aor., 847; caus., 1042 g.

√dhvan, pple, 955 a, 956 b; caus., 1042 g.
√dhvṛ, pple, 955 e.
n, pron. etc., 47, 48; as final, 143; for final rdcl m, 143 a, 212 a; change to ṇ, 189–95; to ñ
after and before palatals, 201–3. 208 b; combinations as root-final, 204; loss as stem-final, 204
b; assim. to palatals and linguals, 205; to l, 206; before sibilants, 207; treated as ns, 208, 209;
duplication of final, 210; instability as final, 256, 1203 b; used as union-cons., 257, 313, 482 h;
question of final of pañcan etc., 484; final n in secndry dervn, 1203 c.

ná, comparative, 1122 h.
na added to tha or ta of 2d pl., 549 a; forms so made, 613, 616 b, 618, 621 b, 654, 658,
669, 690, 704, 707, 723, 735 b, 740, 752 b, 760 c, 831 a, 839, 849 a.
-na, of pples, 952, 957, 1177; euph., 161 b; scdry, 1223 g, 1245 f; in compsn, 1273, 1284.
√nakṣ, 102 a.
√nad, caus., 1042 g.
√nand, euph., 192 a.
√nabh, euph., 192 a; cans., 1042 g.
√nam, pf., 786 a; aor., 890 a, 897 b, 911, 912; fut., 935 b: pple, 954 d; inf., 968 d ; int.,
1017; caus., 1042 g.
-nam, advbl, 1109 a.
√naç be lost, euph., 192 a; aor., 847, 854 b, 867; fut., 935 d, 936 a; des., 1028.
√naç attain, euph., 218 a; pf.,801 g; aor., 833, 834 b, 837 b; des., 1029 c.
√nas, aor., 837 b.
nás, dcln, 387, 397.
-nas, 1152.
√nah, euph., 223 g; pres., 761 c.
-nā, see 1177.
nāgarī, 1 a.
nāsikya, 230 b.
ní, euph., 192 f.
-ni, 1158.
√niṅs, euph., 183 a; pres., 628.
√nij, euph., 219 a; aor., 847; int., 1024.
nitya-circumflex, 84 b.
√nind, pf., 790 b; aor., 840 b.
nilay, quasi-root, 1087 c.
níç and níçā, 397.
nis, loss of initial of, 1087 a.

√nī, aor., 889, 896, 900 b; fut., 935 a; inf., 968 c; tā-ger'd, 991 c; int., 1017, 1018 a;
periphr. pf., 1071 f.
-nī, fem. ending, 1176 d, 1223 c.
nīḍá, euph., 198 d.
√nu or nū, pres., 626 a; aor., 868 a, 887 c; int., 1002 g, 1003.
-nu, 1162.
√nud, aor., 834 d, 904 c; pple, 956 b, 957 d; int, 1017.
nṛ́, dcln, 371.
√nṛt, euph., 192 a; aor., 833, 847, 852 b; inf., 968 d; tvā-ger'd, 991 c.
néd, accent of verb with, 595 e.
nāma, dcln, 525 c.
nāú, dcln, 361 a.
p, pron. etc., 49, 50.
-p, caus.-sign, 1042 i–l; aor. from such caus., 1047.
-pa, 1201.
pakvá as pple, 958.
√pac, pres. 761 b.
√pat, pf., 794 f, h; aor., 847; int., 1002 g; des., 1030, 1031; caus., 1042 g.
páti, dcln, 343 d, e; in dpndt compsn, 1267 a; denom. conj. from, 1054 a.
páth, pathí, pánthan, dcln, 343 j, 395, 433.
√pad, pres., 761 c; aor., 834 b, d, 836, 837 b; pple, 957 d; int., 1002 g; des., 1030.
pád, dcln, 387, 389 b.
pada, 111 a; pada-endings and cases, 111 a, b.
√pan, pf., 794 f; int., 1002 g.
pánthan, see páth.
pára, dcln, 525 c.
parasmāi padam, 529.
párucchepa, euph., 168 b.
palāy, quasi-root, 1087 c.
palyan̄g, quasi-root, 1087 c.

palyay, quasi-root, 1087 c.
√paç, pres., 761 c.
paçcima, dcln, 525 c.
√pā drink, pres., 671, 749 a, 855 a; aor., 830, 838; pple, 954 c; ya-ger'd, 992 a; des., 1028
d; caus., 1042 k.
√pā protect, aor., 912; caus., 1042 m.
pāda, 79, 93 d.
pādapūraṇa, 1122 b.
piṇak, eup'h., 190 c.
√pinv, 699 b, 716 a, 749 b.
√piç, pres., 758; aor. 840 b; pple, 956 b.
√piṣ or piṅṣ, euph., 226 d, f; pres., 694 a, 920 a; aor., 190 c, 758 a.
√pis, euph., 181 d.
√pīḍ, euph., 198 d.
pīpi, conj.-stem, 676, 786 b.
púṁs, púmāṅs, euph., 183 a; dcln, 394.
puraḥsara, puraskṛta, purogama, in compsn, 1302 f.
purā́, pres. in past sense with, 778 a.
puru, in compsn, 1284 b, 1290.
√puṣ, aor., 847.
√pā, pres., 728; aor. (?), 868 a, 894 d; inf., 968 e; caus., 1042 e.
pū́rva, dcln, 525 c; in compsn, 1251 e, 1291 c, 1302 f.

pūṣán, dcln, 426 a.
√pṛ fill, euph., 242c; pres., 731, 761 b, 766; pf., 793 h; pple, 955 d, 957 b; inf., 968 c.
√pṛ pass, pf., 793 h; aor., 896.
√pṛ be busy, pres., 767, 773.
√pṛc, pres., 694 a; aor., 834 c, 836 b, 837 b, 840 b, 890, 894 a: pple, 957 c.
√pṛṇ, 731, 753.
pṛ́t, pṛ́tanā, 397.
pṛ́ṣant, dcln, 450 c.
√pyā or pī, pres., 761 e; pf., 786, 794 b; aor., 912, 914 b.; pple, 957 a; caus., 1042 k.
pragṛhya, 138.
pracaya or pracita accent, 90 a.
√prach, euph., 220; pres., 756 a; pf., 794 c; aor. 834 c, 890; pple, 954 b.
√prath, aor., 840 b, 863 a.
prabhṛti, in compsn, 1302 e.
praçliṣṭa-circumflex, 84 d.
√prā, aor., 830, 889.
prāya, in compsn, 1302 i.
√prī, pres., 731; aor. (?), 866, 868; caus., 1042 m.
√pruth, ya-ger'd, 992 b.
√pruṣ, euph., 226 d, 392 b; pres., 732, 1066 b.
plāy, quasi-root, 1087 c.
√plu, aor., 863 b, 866; ya-ger'd, 992 a; cans., 1042 a.
pluta, 78.
√psa, 102 a.
ph, pron. etc., 49, 50.
√phan, pf., 794 h; int., 1002 g, 1003.
√phal, pf., 794 h.

phullá as pple, 958.
b, pron. etc., 49, 50; interchange with v, 50 a.
√baṅh, euph., 223 b.
√badh or vadh, aor., 904 a; des., 1029 a, 1040.
√bandh, euph., 155 b; pres., 723, 730 a; pf., 794 d; fut., 935 b; inf. 968 d.
bahuvrīhi, 1293 b.
√bādh, euph.. 155 b; aor., 904 d; int., 1002 d, 1003; des., 1029 a, 1031, 1040.
√budh, euph., 155 b; aor., 834 b, d, 839, 840 b, 847.
√bṛh, euph., 223 b; pres., 768; int., 1011; caus., 1042 h.
bṛhánt, dcln, 450 a.
bbh, occurrence, 151 e.
√brū, pres., 632; peculiar construction, 268 a.
bh, pron. etc., 49, 60; anomalously changed to a guttural, 161 d; h from, 223 g.
√bhakṣ, 102 a.
√bhaj, euph., 219 a; pf., 794 h; aor., 834 c, 867, 890 a; fut., 936 b; inf., 968 d.
√bhañj, euph., 219 a; pres., 694; pple, 957 c; tvā-ger'd, 991 d.
bhávant, 466, 514 c.
√bhas, euph., 233 f; pres., 678.
√bhāṣ, inf., 968 d.
√bhikṣ, 102 a.
√bhid, aor., 832, 834 d, 836 a, 840 a, 847; pple, 957 d.
bhiṣaj, euph., 219 a; denom. conj. from, 1054 a.
√bhī, pres., 645, 679; pf., 786 b; aor., 831 a, 840 b, 866, 891, 897 b; caus., 1042 l, m; caus.
aor., 1047; periphr. pf., 1071 f, 1073 a.
√bhīs, 1042 m; aor., 861 a, 1047.
√bhuj bend, euph., 219 a; pple, 957 c; tvā-ger'd, 991 d.
√bhuj enjoy, euph., 219 a; pres., 694 a; aor., 836 b, 847, 912.
√bhur, pres., 756; int., 1002 d.
bhúvas, euph., 176 c.

√bhū, pf., 789 a, 793 b, 800 d; aor., 829, 830, 836–9, 863, 924; inf., 968 e; in periphr.
conjn, 1070–72; in ppial periphr. phrases, 1075 d; in compd conjn, 1091–4.
bhūta in compsn, 1273 c.
√bhṛ, pres., 646, 855 a; pf., 789 b, 797 c; aor., 890 a; int, 1002 g, h, 1003; periphr. pf.,
1071 f.
bhos, 456; euph., 174 b.
√bhraṅç or bhraç, pres., 767; aor., 847; pple, 954 b; caus., 1042 h.
√bhrajj or bhṛjj, euph., 219 b.
√bhram, pres., 763; pf., 794 h; pple, 955 a; inf., 968 d; tvā-ger'd, 991 b; ya-ger'd, 992 c;
caus., 1042 g.
√bhrāj, euph., 219 b; pf., 790 c, 794 h; aor., 833.

m, pron. etc., 49, 50; as final, 143; as final radcl, 143 a, 212, 256; in extrnl combn, 213;
before rāj, 213 b.
-ma, prmy, 1166; scdry, 474, 487 a, d, 1224 b, 1242 c.
√maṅh or mah, pf., 786 a; caus., 1042 g.
maghávan, dcln, 428.
√majj, euph., 219 a; pf., 801 g; aor., 887 a; fut. , 936 a; pple, 957 c; inf., 968 e; des., 1028
j.
-mat, advbl, 1235 e.
√math or manth, pres., 730 a, 731, 732, 1066 b, 746; aor., 899 d; ya-ger'd, 992 b; caus.,
1042 g.
√mad or mand, 102 a; pres, 628, 645, 764; aor., 833, 834 d, 839, 840 b, 887 a, 897 b, 899
d, 904 d; pple, 956 b; caus., 1042 g.
√man, pf., 794 f; aor., 834 b, 840 b, 881 e, 887 a, b; fut., 935 b; pple, 954 d; des., 1028 e,
1029 a, 1040; special construction, 268 a, 994 e.
-man, 1168; man- and ma-stems, 1166 c: man-stems in compsn, 1277 b.
manas, in comp. with infin.-stem, 968 g.
-mane, infin. in, 970 d, 974.
-mant, 1235.
√mantr, so-called, 104 b, 1056, 1067, 1073 d.
mánthan, dcln, 434.
√mand, 102 a: see mad.
-maya, 161 a, 1225.
-mara, 1201 a.
√mah, see maṅh.
máh, mahī́, 400 a.
mahánt, dcln, 450 b.
mahā́, 355 a.
mahāprāṇa, 37 d.
√mā measure, pres., 660, 663; aor., 839; pple, 954 c; inf., 968 f; tvā-gerd, 991 b; ya-ger'd,
992 a; des., 1030.
√mā exchange, pres., 761 f.

√mā bellow, pres., 660, 663, 672, 676 c; aor., 868 e.
mā́ṅs, māṅsá (and mā́s), 397.
mātrā, in compsn, 1302 g; euph., 161 a.
-māna, 584 b, 1174.
mā́s, euph., 168 a; dcln, 389 b, 397: and see mā́ṅs.
√mi fix, aor., 911; des., 1030.
-mi, 1167.
√mikṣ, 1033 a; caus., 1042 b.
mitrá, 1185 c.
-min, 1231.
√mil, fut., 936 b.
√mī or mi damage, pres., 192 c, 731, 761 b; aor., 911; des., 1030; caus., 1042 l.
√mīh, euph., 223 b; pf., 790 b; aor., 916 a, 920 a.
√mīv, pple, 955 b.
√muc, pres., 758, 761 b, 855 a; aor., 832, 834 c, 837 b, 839, 847, 890 a; des., 1030.
√mud, aor., 837 b.
√muv, pres., 732, 1066 b; pple, 956 b; caus., 1042 b.
√muh, euph., 223 a, c; pres., 761 a; aor., 847; pple, 955 e.
√mūrch, 220 a; pres., 745 f; pple, 954 e.
mūrdhanya, 45.
√mṛ die, euph., 242 c; pres., 757, 733; aor., 834 a, 837 b.
√mṛ crush, pres., 731.
√mṛj, euph., 219 b; pres., 621 a, 627, 745 e; pf., 786 a. 793 i; aor., 900 a, 919, 920; fut.,
935 b, 936 d; pple, 956 b, d; inf., 958 c; tvā-ger'd, 991 c; ya-ger'd, 992 b; int, 1002 g, 1003,
1017; des., 1028 j; caus., 1042 b.
√mṛd, euph., 198 d; caus., 1042 b.
√mṛṇ, 731, 753 a.
√mṛd, fut., 936 d.
√mṛdh, aor., 838, 847.
√mṛç, pf., 786 a; aor., 916, 920; pple, 956 b; int., 1002 g, 1003, 1017.
√mṛṣ, aor., 834 c, 840 a, 847.

-mna, 1224 c.
√mnā, 102 a; aor., 912.
√mruc, aor., 847.
√mlā, pres., 761 c; aor., 912; pple, 957 a; caus., 1042 j.
√mluc, int., 1002 g.
y, pron. etc., 51, 66, 56; relation to i-vowels, 55; nasal y, 71 c, 213 d; y as union-consonant,
258, 313 b, 844, 1112 e, 1151 d, 1230 e, 996 b; resolved to i, 55, 113 b, 129 c; cases of loss
of i before, 233 a; y of sfx treated as i, 1203 a.
ya contracted to i, 262, 769, 784 b, 794 b.
ya as conj.-class-sign, 606, 759; as passive-sign, 606, 768, 998 a;

added to intens. stem, 1016; in caus. sign, 1055 a; as denom. sign, 1055–67.
-ya (or yā) of gerund, 990, 992, 993; of gerundive, 962, 963, 1213.
-ya, prmy, 1187, 1213; ya-stems in compsn, 1272; scdry, 1210–12.
yakán, yákṛt, 398 a, 432.
√yaj, euph., 219 b, 784b; pres., 628; pf., 784 b; aor., 834 c, 839, 890 a, 894 d; inf., 968 d;
des., 1029 c.
√yat, aor., 840 b; pple, 956 b.
yáthā, accent,. 1101 b; in compsn, 1313 c–e.
√yam, pres., 608 b, 631 a, 747; pf., 790 b; aor., 833, 836–9, 887 a, 890 a, 896, 897 b, 911;
fut., 935 b; pple, 954 d; inf., 968 d; tvā-ger'd, 991 b; caus., 1042 g.
yama, 230 a.
√yas, aor., 847; pple, 956 b.
-yas for -īyas, 470 a.
√yā, 102 a; aor., 894 c, 912, 914 c.
-yā, 1213 d.
-yin, see 1230 e.
√yu unite, pres., 626 a, 765; ya-ger'd, 992 a.
√yu separate, pres., 608 a, 645; aor., 838, 868 a, 889, 894 b; int., 1018 a; caus., 1042 e.
-yu, 1165; see 1178 h–j.
√yuj, euph., 219 a; pres., 758 a; aor., 832, 834 b, 836 b, 837 a, 839, 840 b, 847, 887 a;
root-noun, 386.
√yudh, aor., 834 d, 836 b, 839, 887 a.
√yup, int., 1017.
yúvan, dcln, 427.
yūṣá, yūṣán, 432.
yóṣan, dcln, 426 b.
r, pron. etc., 51, 52; r and l, 53 b; r and s as corresponding sonant and surd, 117 b, 158 a,
164; final, 144, 169; words ending in original r, 169 a; combination as final rdcl, 165; as other,
178; avoidance of double, 179; s or r as final of certain forms, 169 b; from s after a, 176 c; s

to ṣ after, 180 ff.; but not before, 181 a, b; changes succeeding n to ṇ, 189 ff.; duplication of
consonant after, 228; svarabhakti after, 230 c.
r-endings in 3d pl., 613, 618, 629, 699 b, 738 a, 752 b, 799, 813, 818 a.
ra and rā as increments of r, 241.
-ra, prmy, 1188; scdry, 474, 1226, 1242 c.
√rakṣ, aor., 899 d.
√raj or rañj, euph., 219 a; pres., 746, 767; caus., 1042 g.
√radh or randh, pf., 786 a, 794 h; aor., 847.
√ran, pf., 786 a; aor., 899 d.
√rabh, pf., 786 a, 794 h; aor., 834 d, 897 b; des., 1030.
√ram, aor., 911, 912; pple, 954 d; inf., 968 d; tvā-ger'd, 991 b; caus., 1042 g.
√rā give, pres., 660, 666, 672; aor., 839, 896.
√rā bark, pres., 761 e.
√rāj, euph., 213 b, 219 b; pf., 794 h.
√rādh, pf., 794 h; aor., 836; des., 1030.
√ri or rā, caus., 1042 l.
-ri, 1191.
√ric, pres., 761 b; aor., 834 c, 839, 847, 890.
√riç, aor., 916.
√riṣ, euph., 226 f; aor., 847, 852 a, 853, 870; caus., 1042 b.
√rih, euph., 223 b; int., 1017.
√rī, see ri.
√ru, pres., 626, 633, 755.
-ru, 1192.
√ruc, aor., 834 c, 837 b, 840 b, 847; desid., 1031 b.
√ruj, euph., 219 a; aor., 832; pple, 957 c; tvā-ger'd, 991 c.
√rud, pres., 631; aor., 847; tvā-ger'd, 991 d.
√rudh, pres., 694 a, 758 a, 855 a; pf., 801 h; aor., 832, 834 d, 847, 887 a, 890 a; inf., 968
d; ya-ger'd, 992 b.
√ruç, aor., 916; caus., 1042 b.
rúçant, dcln, 450 c.

√ruṣ, pple, 956 b.
√ruh, euph., 223 b, d; aor., 840 b, 847, 853, 916, 920 a, b; fut., 935 d; inf., 968 d; ya-ger'd,
992 c; caus., 1042 l.
repha, 18.
rāí, dcln, 361 b, f.
-rhī, advbl, 1103 d.
l, pron. etc., 51, 53; l and r, 53 b; l for r in certain verbal prefixes, 1087 c; nasal l, 71 b, c,
206, 213 d; as final, 144; assim. to, 117 g; of t, 162; of n, 206; of m, 213 d;

asserted s to ṣ after, 180 b; duplication of consonant after, 228 a; svarabhakti after, 230 d.
-la, prmy, 1189; scdry, 1227.
√lag, pple, 957 c; tvā-ger'd, 991 c; caus., 1042 g.
√lajj, pres., 754.
√lap, pple, 956 b; infin., 968 c.
√labh, aor., 834 d; fut., 935 b; des., 1030.
√lal, caus., 1042 g.
√likh, fut., 936 b.
√lip, pres., 753, 758: aor., 834 d; 847.
√liç, aor., 916.
√lih, euph., 223 b; aor., 916, 920 a.
√lī cling, aor., 911; pple, 957 a; ya-ger'd, 992 a; caus., 1042 l, m.
√lī totter, int., 1018 a, 1022.
√lup, pres., 758, 761 b; aor., 887 a.
√lubh, pres., 761 a.
√lū, pres., 728 a; pple, 957 a.
ḻ, pron. etc., 5 a, 54.
v, pron. etc., 51, 57, 58; relation to u-vowels, 57 a; interchange with b, 50 a; nasal v, 71 c,
213 d; resolved to u, 58 a, 113 b; cases of loss of u before, 233 a; duplication of consonants
after, 228 a.
va, contracted to u, 252, 769, 784, 794 b.
-va, prmy, 1190; scdry, 1228; advbl, 1102 e. f.
√vakṣ, pple, 956 b.
√vac, euph., 216 l; pres., 660; pf., 784, 789 d; aor., 847, 853, 854 a.
√vañc, euph., 216 l; pf., 786 a.
-vat, advbl, 1107, 1233 f; scdry, 383 k. 1, 1245 j.
√vad, 102 a; pres., 738 a; pf., 784; aor., 899 d, 904 d; pple, 956 d; int., 1017; desid., 1031
b.

√vadh, see badh.
√van, pf., 786 a, 794 f; aor., 839, 887 b, 912, 914; pple, 955 b; des., 1028 g.
-van, prmy, 1169; scdry, 1234; van-stems in compsn, 1277, 1287 b.
-vana, -vani, -vanu, 1170; -vana, 1425 l.
-vane, infln. in, 970 d, 974.
-vant, 517, 959, 1233; prmry, 1233 g.
√vand, 102 a.
√vap, pf., 784; fut., 935 b; pple, 954 b.
√vam, pres., 631 a; pple, 955 a; tvā-ger'd, 991 b; caus., 1042 g.
vam (from vṛ), 543 a.
-vam, advbl, 1102 b.
-vaya, 1228 b.
-vara, 1171.
-varī, fem. to van, 1169, 1171, 1234 a.
varga, 32.
√varṇ, so-called, 1056.
-vala, 1228 b.
√vaç, pres., 638, 660; pf., 784, 786 a.
√vas shine, euph., 167 ; pres., 608 b, 753 b; pf., 784; aor., 834 b; pple, 956 b, d.
√vas clothe, euph., 167 ; pres., 628, 631 a, 638 a; pf., 786 a.
√vas dwell, euph., 167; pf., 784; aor., 840 b, 883; fut., 935 d; pple, 956 b, d; inf., 968 c;
tvā-ger'd, 991 c; in periphr. conj. 1070 c; periphr. pf., 1071 f.
-vas, 1173 b: and see vāṅs.
√vah, euph., 137 c, 223 b, 224 b; pf., 784; aor., 837 b, 839, 840 b, 890 a; fut., 935 d; pple,
954 b; int., 1002 g, 1017; at end of compds, 408.
√vā blow, aor., 912; pple. 957 a.
√vā droop, pres., 761 e.
√vā or vi weave, pres., 761 f; pf., 784, 801 b; fut., 935 c; pple, 954 e; inf., 968 f; caus.,
1042 k.
√vāṅs (or -vas), of pples, 584 c, 802–6, 1173; vāṅs-stems, dcln, 458 ff.
vāgháṭ, dcln, 444 a.

√vāç, pf., 786 a; aor., 861 a.
ví, dcln, 343 b.
-vi, 1193.
vikampana, 87 d.
√vic, int., 1024.
√vij, euph., 219 a; aor., 834 c; fut., 935 b. 936 c; pple, 957 c; int., 1017, 1024.
-vit, see 1193 b.
√vid know, 102 a; pres. 613, 618, 621 a; pf., 790 a, 803 a; fut., 935 b; inf., 968 d; des.,
1031 b; periphr. pf., 1071 f, 1073 a; periphr. aor. and pres., 1073 b, c.
√vid find, 102 a; pres., 758; pf., 805 b ; aor., 847, 852 a; pple, 957 d.
vidhā, in compsn, 1302 i.

-vin, 1232.
√vindh, pres., 758.
√vip, aor., 840 b; caus., 1042 b.
virāma, 11.
√viç, euph., 218 a; pf., 803 a, 805 b; aor., 834 b, 916, 920 a.
víçva, dcln, 524; in compsn, 1251 e, 1280 c, 1298 c.
√viṣ, euph., 225 a, 226 d, f; aor., 916; int., 1024.
visarga, visarjanīya, 67: and see ḥ.
√vī, int, 1017, 1024 a.
√vṛ cover, 102 a; pres. (ūrṇu), 713; aor., 831 a, 834 a, 836 b, 839, 840 b, 900 b; inf., 968
d; int., 1002 g.
√vṛ choose, 102 a; euph., 102 a, 242 c; pf., 797 c ; aor., 837 b, 840 b; inf., 968 d; caus.,
1042 e.
√vṛj, euph., 219 a; pf., 786 a, 803 a; aor., 832, 834 c, 836–9, 919, 920 a; int., 1002 g.
√vṛt, pres., 643 c, 855 a; pf., 786 a; aor., 832, 834 b, 836 b, 839, 840 a, 847, 904 d; fut,
935 b, 943 a; inf., 968 e; int, 1002 g, 1003, 1017, 1023.
vṛtrá, 1185 c.
vṛddhi, 27, 235 ff.
√vṛdh, pf., 786 a; aor., 847, 852 a, b, 897 b; fut., 943 a; inf., 968 e.
√vṛṣ, pf., 786 a; aor., 847; inf., 968 d.
vṛ́ṣan, dcln, 426 b.
√vṛh, aor., 916, 920 a.
voc, quasi- root, 854 a.
-vya, 1228 c.
√vyac, 1087 f; pres., 682; pf., 785, 794 b.
vyañjana, 31.
√vyath, pf.. 785.
√vyadh, pres., 767; pf., 786, 794 b; fut, 936 b; pple, 954 b; inf., 968 f; caus., 1042 g.
√vyay, pres., 761 f.
√vyā or vī, pres., 761 f; pf., 785, 794 b, 801 c; aor., 847; fut, 935 c; pple, 954 c; caus.,

1012 k.
√vraj, euph., 219 b; aor., 899 d.
√vraçc, euph., 221 b; pple, 957 c; tvā-ger'd, 991 c.
√vlī, pres., 728 b; pple, 957 a; int, 1017; caus., 1042 l.
ç, pron., etc., 59, 63, 64, 119; relation to ṣ, 63 a; as final, 145; in intrnl combn, 218; with
preceding t or n, 203.
-ça, 1229.
√çaṅs, pf., 790 c; ya-ger'd, 992 c.
√çak, aor., 837 a, 839, 847; pple, 956 b; des., 1030, 1040.
çakán, çákṛt, 398, 432.
√çan̄k, aor., 904 d.
√çad prevail, pf., 786.
√çad fall, pple, 957 d.
√çap, aor., 233 e; inf., 968 c.
√çam labor, pres., 634, 763.
√çam be quiet, pres., 763; aor., 847; pple, 955 a; caus., 1042 g.
√çaç, pf., 794 j.
√ças, aor., 839.
-ças, advbl, 1106.
√çā, pres., 660, 662, 753 c, 761 g; aor., 834 a; pple, 954 c; caus., 1042 k.
√çās (or çiṣ), pres., 444, 639, 675; aor., 847, 852 a, 854 c; pple, 954 e, 956 b; inf., 968 c;
ya-ger'd, 992 c; desid., 1031 b; āçís from, 225 a, 392 b.
√çiñj, euph., 219 a; pres., 628.
√çiṣ leave, euph., 226 f; pres., 694 a, 758 a; aor., 847, 853.
√çiṣ, see çās.
√çī lie, pres., 628, 629; pf., 806 a; fut, 935 a; pple, 956 c; ya-ger'd, 992 c.
√çuc, pres., 631 a; aor., 847; int, 968 d; tvā-ger'd, 991 c; caus., 1042 b.
√çudh, caus., 1042 h.
√çubh, pres., 758; aor., 852 a, b, 840 b; caus., 1042 b.
√çuṣ, pres., 761 a.

çúṣka as pple, 958.
√çū, see çvā.
√çūṣ, euph., 240 b.
√çṛ crush, euph., 242 b; pres., 731; pf., 793 h; aor., 900 a, 904 b; pple, 955 d, 957 b; inf.,
968 d.
√çcand, int, 1002 g.
√çnath, pres., 631 a; aor., 867.
√çyā or çī, pres., 761 e; pple, 954 c, 957 a.
√çrath, pres., 732, 1066 b, 758; pf, 794h; pple, 956 d.
√çram, pres., 763; pf., 794 h; aor., 847; pple, 955 a; caus., 1042 g.
√çrā, pres., 761 e; pple, 954 b; caus. 1042 j; caus. aor., 861 b, 1047.

√çri, aor., 831, 867, 868, 889 a; inf., 968 e; caus., 1042 l.
√çriṣ, aor., 847.
√çrī, pple, 955 d.
√çrīv, see srīv.
√çru, euph., 243; pres., 699 b, 711; pf., 797 c; aor., 831, 836, 838, 839, 853, 866, 867;
desid., 1040; caus., 1042 e.
√çruṣ, 102 a.
√çliṣ, euph., 226 d, f; pres., 761 c; aor., 847, 916.
√çvañc, aor., 863 a.
çván, dcln, 427.
√çvas, pres., 631; pple, 956 b; caus., 1042 g.
√çvā or çvi or çū, pf., 786 c, 791 b; aor., 847, 868, 897 b; pple, 957 a; inf., 968 e.
√çvit, aor., 832, 890.
ṣ, pron. etc., 59, 61, 62, 120, 182; relation to ç, 63 a; ordinary derivation, 46; exceptional
occurrence, 182; as final, 145, 145 b; s changed to, 180–8; recurrence avoided, 181 c, 184 e,
1028 i; as root final, 182 a, 184 c, 225, 226; changes succeding n to ṇ, 189 ff.; assim. of dental
after, 197; from ç, 218.
-ṣaṇi, (or -sani), infln in, 970 h, 978, 1159 c, 1160 a.
ṣaṣ, euph., 146 b, 199 c.
-ṣe (or -se), infln. in, 970 c, 973 b.
√ṣṭhīv, euph., 240 b; pres., 745 g, 765; pf., 789 c; pple, 955 c; tvā-ger'd, 991 d.
-ṣyāi (or -syāi), infin. in, 970 g, 977.
s, pron. etc., 59, 60; s and r as corresponding surd and sonant, 117 b, 158 a, 164; s or r as
final of certain forms, 169 b; as final, 145, 169, 170 a; combinations of final rdcl s, 145 b, 166–
8; of other, 170–7; exceptional cases, 171, 173; final as, 175, 176; ās, 177; s to ṣ, 180–8;
exceptional cases, 181, 184 e, 185 c, d, 186 a; ṭ adds t before, 199 e; final n adds (retains) s,
208, 209; s lost between mutes, 233 c–f; in s-aor., 834, 881, 883; after a vowel, 233 b;
exceptional combination after such loss, 233 f; s anomalously from final root-consonant, 406 a; s
before ām of gen. pl., 313 a, 496 c; in aor., 874 ff.; in fut., 931 ff.; in desid., 1027 ff.
-s, advbl, 1105.
-sa, 1197.

sa-, 1121 e; in compsn, 1288 g, 1304 f–h, 1313 f.
saṁvṛta a, 21.
sákhi, dcln, 343 a–c.
sakthán, sákthi, 343 i, 431.
√sagh, aor., 836 b.
√sac, pres., 660; pf., 794f; aor., 840 b; saçc from, 673, 675.
√saj or sañj, euph., 219 a; pres., 746; pf., 794 d, h, 801 h; aor., 834 c, 887 a; inf., 968 f;
des., 1028 i; caus., 1042 h.
√sad, pres., 748; aor., 847, 852 a, 853, 899 d; fut., 935 b, 936 c; pple, 957 d; inf., 968 d.
√san or sā, pf., 804; aor., 847, 853, 899 d; pple, 955 b; int., 1002 g; des., 1028 g, i, 1032 a.
-sani, infln. in, see -ṣaṇi.
saṁdhi, 109.
saṁdhyakṣara, 28 a, 30.
sannatara, 90 c.
√sabhāg, so-called, 104 b, 1067.
samānākṣara, 30.
samprasāraṇa, 252 a.
samrāj etc., 213 b.
-sara, 1201 a.
sarágh or saráḍ, 389 b.
sárva, dcln, 524; in compsn, 1251 e, 1298 c.
√saçc, pres., 444, 673, 673.
sás, euph., 176 a, b.
-sas, 1152.
√sah, euph., 186 a, 223 b, 224 b; pres., 628; pf., 786 a, 790 b, 803 a; aor., 837, 838, 887 a,
897 a, b, 899 d; fut, 935 d; pple, 955 e; inf., 968 d; des., 1030; at end of cmpds, 405.
sahá, in cmpsn, 1304 f, g.
√sā or si bind, pres., 753 c; aor., 830, 834 a, 839, 868 a, 894 c; fut., 935 a, 936 b; pple,
954 c; inf., 968 f; ya-ger'd, 992 a; caus., 1042 k.
-sāt, advbl, 1108.
√sādh, aor., 861 a.

-sāna, ppial words in, 897 b, 1175.
√sāntv, so-called, 104 b.
√si, see sā.
√sic, pres., 758; aor., 847; tvā-ger'd, 991 d; caus., 1042 h.

√sidh repel, fut., 935 b.
√sāv, pres., 761 c, 765; pple, 955 c; des., 1028 h, i.
√su press out, pres., 699 b; aor., 839, 840 b, 867; fut. 935 a; ya-ger'd, 992 a.
su-, 1121 h, i; in compsn, 1284 a, b, 1288, 1304 c, d.
-su, see 1178 f.
√subh, pres., 758.
√sū or su, pres., 626, 628, 755; pf., 789 a; aor., 868 a; fut., 935 a, 936 b, 939 b; inf. 968 d,
e.
√sūc, aor., 861.
√sūd, aor., 871.
√sṛ, pf., 797 c, 806 a; aor., 847; caus., 1042 e.
√sṛj, euph., 216 l, 219 b, c; aor., 834 b, c, 840 b, 890; fut, 936 d.
√sṛp, euph., 151 d; pf., 790 c; aor., 834 d, 847; fut., 935 b, 936 d; inf., 968 e; int., 1002 g.
-se, infln. in, see -ṣe.
soṣman, 37 d.
sk, original of ch, 42.
√skand, aor., 833, 890 b; pple, 957 d; ya-ger'd, 992 b; int., 1002 g, h.
√skabh or skambh, pres., 730, 732, 1066 b; pf., 786 a, 790 b, 794 d.
√sku, pres., 626 a; int., 1017.
√stan, pres., 631 a; aor., 899 d.
√stabh or stambh, euph., 233 c; pres., 730, 732, 1066 b; pf., 794 d; pple, 956 b.
-stāt for -tāt, advbl, 1100 b.
√stigh, desid., 1031 b.
√stu, pres., 626, 633; pf., 797 c; aor., 866, 894 b, d; fut, 935 a; ya-ger'd, 992 a; desid.,
1028 i; caus., 1042 e.
√stṛ, euph., 242 c; pf., 801 f, 806 a; aor., 831, 834 a, 885, 900 a; pple, 957 b; inf., 968 d;
ya-ger'd, 992 a.
stṛ́, dcln, 371 k.
√stṛh, aor., 916.
√styā, pres., 761 e; pple, 957 a.

strī, dcln, 366, 367 c.
√sthā, euph., 233 c; pres., 671, 749 a; aor., 830, 834 a, 836, 837, 840 a, 847, 884, 894 c;
pple, 954 c; inf., 968 f; caus. aor., 861 b, 1047; in ppial periphr. phrases, 1075 c.
-sna, 1195.
√snā, caus., 1042 j.
√snih, euph., 223 a, c.
√snu, pres., 626 a.
-snu, 1194.
sparça, 31, 32.
√spaç, aor., 834 c.
√spṛ, aor., 831, 836 b, 839.
√spṛdh, euph., 242 d; aor., 834 b, 840 b.
√spṛç, euph., 218 a; aor., 916, 920 a; fut., 936 d.
√spṛh, euph., 223 b, d; caus., 1042 d.
√sphā, pple, 964 c; caus., 1042 m.
√sphuṭ, fut, 936 b.
√sphṛ, pres., 756; tvā-ger'd, 991 d; caus., 1042 b.
sphoṭana, 230 e.
sma, in pronom'l dcln, 493, 496 a, 503.
sma, pres. in past sense with, 778 b, c.
√smi, tvā-ger'd, 991 d; caus., 1042 l; periphr. pf., 1071 f.
√smṛ, pass., 770 c; tvā-ger'd, 991 d; caus., 1042 e.
sya as denom. sign, 1064.
√syand, pf., 785 a; aor., 861 a, 890 b; fut, 943 a; pple, 957 d; tvā-ger'd, 991 d; int., 1002 g.
√syam, pf., 794 b.
syás, euph., 176 a.
-syāi, infln. in, see -ṣyāi.
sráj, euph., 219 a.
√sras or sraṅs, euph., 168; pf., 790 c; aor., 833, 847; ya-ger'd, 992 b.
√sridh, aor., 847, 852 b.

√srīv (or çrīv), euph., 240 b ; pres., 765; caus., 1042 b.
√sru, pf., 797 c; aor., 868; caus., 1042 e.
sva, 513 b, 416 e; dcln, 525 c.
√svaj, euph., 219 a; pres., 746; pf., 794 h; aor., 863 a; tvā-ger'd, 991 c.
svátavas, euph., 168 a, 415 b.
√svad, pple, 954 f.
√svan, pf., 794 h; aor., 899 d; int, 1002 g.
√svap, pres., 631; pf., 786 b, 794 b; aor., 867; fut, 935 b; pple, 954 b; des., 1028 h; caus.,
1042 g.
svayam, in compsn, 1284 b.
√svar, aor., 890 a, 899 d.
svàr, dcln, 388.
svara, 30, 81.
svarabhakti, 230 c–e.
svarita, 81.
svávas, euph., 168 a, 416 b.
√svid, pple, 957 d.

h, pron. etc., 59, 65, 66, 119; from dh and bh, 223 g; as final, 147; compensating aspiration
of initial, 147, 155 b; with following t or th, 160 a; with preceding final mute, 163; m before h
and another cons., 213 g; reversion to gh, 214 ff., 222; in inflection, 402, 637; in pf., 787; in
intens., 1002 i; in desid., 1028 f; internal combn, 222–4; anomalously changed to a sibilant, 150
f; to d, 404; duplication of a cons. after, 228 a; nāsikya added after, 230 b; loss before hi, 1011
a.
-ha, advbl, 1100 a, 1104 b.
√had, pple, 957 d.
√han, euph., 192 b, 216 l, 402, 637, 787; pres., 637, 673, 709; pf., 794 e, 805 a; aor., 899
d; fut., 935 b, 943 a; pass., 998 f; pple, 954 d; inf., 968 d; int., 1002 g, h, i, 1003; des., 1028
e, f; caus., 1042 m; root-noun, 383 h, 402.
hánta, accent of verb with, 598 a.
√has, jakṣ from, 640.
√hā move, pres., 660, 664; des., 1028 d; caus., 1042 d.
√hā leave, pres., 665, 761 b; aor., 830, 889, 912; fut., 936 c; pple, 957 a; inf., 968 f; caus.
aor., 861 b, 1047.
√hās, 102 a, 912.
√hi, euph., 192 c, 216 l, 674, 787; pres., 699 b, 716 a; aor., 831, 839, 840 b, 847, 889 a,
894 d; des., 1028 f.
hí, 595 e, 1122 b.
-hi, advbl, 1100 c.
√hiṅs, euph., 183 a; pres., 687, 696; des., 1031 b.
√hinv, 716 a.
√hīḍ, euph., 240 b; pf., 786 b; caus., 1042 b.
√hu, pres., 645, 647 c, 652; periphr. pf. etc., 1071 f, 1073 c.
√hū or hvā, pres., 761 f, 755; pf., 794 b; aor., 834 a, 847, 887 c, 912; fut., 935 c; inf., 968
f; caus., 1042 k; periphr. pf., 1071 f.
√hṛ seize, aor., 834 a, 890 a; inf., 968 d; caus., 1042 e.
√hṛ́d, hṛ́daya, 397.
√hṛṣ, aor., 847; pple, 956 b.
√hnu, pres., 626 a.
√hras, pple, 956 b.

√hrī, pres., 645; aor., 840 b; pple, 957 a; caus., 1042 l; periphr. pf., 1071 f.
√hvā, see hū.
√hvṛ or hvar, euph., 242 c; pres., 682; aor., 863 a, 890; pple, 955 e.

GENERAL INDEX.
a-aorist (simple aorist, 2), 824, 846–54: in the later language, 846; roots forming it in the older
language, 847; inflection, 848; modes, 849–51; participles, 852; irregularities, 853, 854.
a-class (first, bhū-class) of verbs, 606, 734–50; formation of stem, 734; inflection, 735–43;
roots of the class, 744; irregularities, 745–50.
á-class or accented a-class (sixth, tud-class) of verbs, 606, 751–8: formation of stem, 751;
inflection, 752; roots of the class, 753, 754; irregularities, 755–8.
a-conjugation — see conjugations.
a- or ā-declension, transference of cons.-stems to, 399, 415 a, 429 a, 437, 441 b; 1148 i,
1149 a, 1166 c, 1209; 1315.
a-stems (tense-stems), uniform inflection of, 733 a.
abbreviation of consonant-groups, 231–3.
ablative case, uses of, 289–93; ablative of comparison, 292 b; with prepositions, 293, 1128;
used adverbially, 1114; abl. infinitive, 983; abl. by attraction with infln., 983 b; abl. use of
adverbs in tas, 1098 d; abl. as prior member of compound, 1250. f.
absolute use of instrumental, 281 g; of genitive, 300 b; of locative, 303 b–d; of gerund, 994
e.
absolutive — see gerund.
abstract nouns, secondary derivation of, 1206, 1236–40.
accent, general, 80–97: its varieties, 80–6; accentuated texts, 87; modes of designating, 87,
88; illustration of RV. method, pp. 518–9; over-refinements of Hindu theory, 90; modern delivery
of ancient accented texts, 91; no sentence accent, 92; accentless words, 93; words doubly
accented, 94, 1255, 1267 d; accent of protracted syllable, 78 a; freedom of place of accent, 95;
— changes of accent in vowel combination, 128, 130, 135 a; — accent in declension, 314–20; of
vocative, 92 a, 314; change of accent in monosyllabic etc. declension, 316–9; in numeral, 482 g,
483 a–c; of fractionals, 488 a; of case-forms used as adverbs, 1111 g, 1112 e, 1114 d; different
accent of action-nouns and agent-nouns, 1144 a; of determinative and possessive compounds,
1296; — accent of personal endings, 552–4; in relation to strong and weak forms, 556; of
personal verb-forms in the sentence, 92 b, 591–8; of periphrastic formations, 945, 1073 e; of
compounded verb-forms, 1082–5; — accent in primary derivation, 1144; in secondary, 1205; in
composition, 1251; — ordinary accentuation of Skt. words by Western scholars, 96.
accusative case, uses of, 269–77: with verbs, 270, 274; with nouns and adjectives, 271, 272;
with prepositions, 273, 1129; with verbs of motion and address etc., 274; cognate, 275;
adverbial, 276, 1111; double, 277; accus. infinitive, 981, 986–8; gerund, 995; accus. as prior
member of compound, 1250 a.

action-nouns and agent-nouns, chief classes of primary derivatives, 1145, 1146.

active voice, in verbs, 528, 529.
acute (udātta) accent, 81.
ad-class of verbs — see root-class.
adjective, its distinction from noun, 322; from pple, 967; formation of compound adj., 323–5,
1292 ff.; inflection of adj., 321–465; comparison, 466–74; adj. pronominally inflected, 522–6.
adjective compounds, secondary, 1247 g, 1292–1313; of other than possessive value, 1294,
1309, 1310; adj. copulative compounds, 1257.
adverbs, 1097–1122: adv. by derivation, 1097–1109; case-forms used as adv., 1110–17;
adverbial compounds, 1111 d, 1313; verbal prefixes etc. as adv., 1118–20; inseparable prefixes,
1121; other miscellaneous adv., 1122; adv. used prepositionally, 1123 ff.; adv. copulative
compounds, 1259; forms of comparison, 473 b.
agent-nouns — see action-nouns.
aggregative compounds — see copulative compounds.
alphabets used for writing Sanskrit, 1; older Indian, 2; the Devanāgarī alph., 1–17; varieties
of writing and of type for, 3, pp. 516–7; characters and transliteration, 5; arrangement, 7;
theory of use, 8, 9; native moda of writing, 9 a, b; modifications of this in Western practice, 9
c–e; vowel-writing, 10; consonant combinations, 12–15; other signs, 11, 16; numeral figures, 17;
names of characters, 18; signs and transliteration of anusvāra, 73.
alphabet, spoken — see system of sounds.
alterant vowels, changing following s to ṣ, 180.
analysis of language in to its elements, 98, 99; anal. of compound words, 1248.
antithetical construction, its influence on accent of verb, 596, 597.
anusvāra, its pronunciation etc., 70–2; signs and transliteration, 73, 16 b: see also ṅ, ṁ.
aorist tense, 632; its uses, 926–30; in prohibitive expression, 579; — aor. system, 535, 824–
930: classification of forms of aor., 824; character and occurrence, 825–7; variety from same
root, 827 b, c; simple aor., 824, 828: 1. root-aor., 829–41; passive aor. 3d. sing., 842–5; 2. a-
aor., 846–54; 3. reduplicated or causative aor., 856–73; sibilant-aor., 874–920; 4. s-aor., 878–
897; 5. iṣ-aor., 898–910; 6. siṣ-aor., 911–15; 7. sa-aor., 916–20; aor. optative or precative of
later language, 921–5; aor. in secondary conjugation, 1019, 1035, 1046–8, 1068; periphrastic
aor., 1073 b; — s-aor. stem in derivation, 1140 c.
appositional compounds, 1280 d; appos. possessive compounds, 1302.
ar or ṛ in root and stem forms, 104 e, 237.
article, indefinite, represented later by eka, 482 c.
aspirate mutes, phonetic character etc. of, 37, 38; their deaspiration, 114, 163–5; restoration
of lost aspiration to, 141 a, 147, 155; not before impv. ending dhi, 155 f; derivation of h from,

66; sonant aspirate with following t, th, 160; non-aspirate for aspirate in reduplication, 590 a:
— and see the different letters.
aspiration (h), its pronunciation etc., 59, 65, 66: — and see h.
asseverative particles, 1122 a, b.
assimilation in euphonic combination, 115–20; with or without change of articulate position,
116; surd and sonant, 117, 156–64; nasal, 117 g, 198 b, 199 c; l, 117 g, 206; dental to lingual
and palatal, 118; other cases, 118–20.
augment, 585–7; a as augment, 585 a; omission, 587; irreg. combination with initial vowel of
root, 136 a; irregularly placed, 1087 c, f; uses of augmentless preterit persons, 563, 587; with
mā prohibitive, 579.
avyayībhāva compounds, 1313.
bahuvrīhi compounds — see possessive compounds.
benedictive — see precative.
bhū-class of verbs — see a-class.
cardinal numerals, 475; their combinations, 476–81; inflection, 482-

–5; construction, 486; derivatives, 487–9.
case-endings — see endings of declension.
case-forms, prolongation of final vowel of. 248 b; used as adverbs, 1110–17; change of
accent in such, 1111 g, 1112 e, 1114 d; their prepositional uses, 1125 d; derivatives from case-
forms, 1202 b; case-forms in composition, 1250.
cases, 266; their order of arrangement, 266 a; uses, 267–305: — and see the different
cases.
causative conjugation, 540, 607, 775, 856 ff., 1041–52; relation to so-called tenth or cur-
class, 607, 1041 b; to denominative, 1041 c, 1056; formation of stem, 1041, 1042; inflection,
present-system, 775, 1043; other older forms, 1044; perfect, 1045; attached reduplicated aorist,
1046, 1047, 856 ff.; other aorist forms, 1048, 1049; future etc., 1050; verbal nouns and
adjectives, 1051; derivative or tertiary conjugations from caus. stem, 1052; caus. from intens.,
1025; from desid., 1039; declinable stems from caus. stem, 1140 b; double object with
causatives, 277 a, 282 b.
cerebral mutes, 33, 45.
changeable or variable ṛ of roots — see variable.
circumflex, (svarita) accent, 81–6, 90 b; independent, 81–4; its varieties, 84; enclitic, 85;
their difference, 86; designation, 87–9; occurrence from vowel combinations, 128, 130, 135.
classes or series of mutes, 32 ff.
classes of verbs — see conjugation-classes.
clauses, simplicity of combination of, 1131 a; dependent clauses, mode in, 581, 950; accent
of verb in, 595.
collective singular form of copulative compounds, 1253 c; in Veda, 1255 e, 1256 b.
combination of elements, 100, 101; euphonic rules for, 109–260; distinction of internal and
external, 109–12; general arrangement of rules, 124; order of comb. of three successive vowels,
127 b.
comparison of adjectives etc., 466–74; primary, in īyas and īṣṭha, 467–70, 1184; secondary,
in tara and tama, 471–3, 1242 a, b; in ra and ma, 474, 1242 c; inflection of comparatives in
yas, 463–5; comp. of nouns, pronouns, prepositions, 473, 474, 520, 1119; of verbs, 473 c;
double comparison, 473 d; particles of comp., 1101 b, 1102 e, 1107, 1122 g, h.
comparison or likeness, descriptive compounds of, 1291 a.
compensatory vowel-lengthening, 246.
composition of stems — see compound stems.
compound conjugation, 540 a, 1076–95: roots with verbal prefixes and like elements, 1076–

89; accent of comp. forms, 1082–6; irreglarities, 1087; roots with inseparable prefixes, 1089,
1121 b, g, i; with noun and adjective stems, 1090–5.
compound stems, formation of, 101, 1246–1316: difference of earlier and later language as
to composition, 1246 a; classification of compounds, 1247; their analysis, 1248; rules of
phonetic combination, 1249; case-forms as prior member, 1250; accent, 1251; copulative comp.
, 1252–61 ; determinative: dependent, 1262–78; descriptive, 1279–91; secondary adjective:
possessive, 1292–1308; participial, 1309; prepositional, 1310; adjective comp. as nouns and as
adverbs, 1311–3; anomalous comp., 1314; stem-finals altered in comp., 1315; loose construction
with comp., 1316.
conditional tense, 532, 940, 941; its uses, 950; conditional uses of optative and subjunctive,
581 b, e, f.
conjugation, verbal inflection, 527–1095; general, 527–98; voice, 528–31; tenses and their
uses, 592, 776–9, 821–3, 926–30, 948–50; modes and their uses, 533, 557–82, 921–5; tense-
systems, 535; present-system, 535, 599–779; perfect-system, 780–823; aorist-systems, 824–930;
future-systems, 931–50; number and person, 536; personal endings, 541–56; verbal adjectives
and nouns, 537–9, 951–95; secondary conjugations, 540, 996–1068; peri-

phrastic and compound conjugation, 540 a, 1069–95; examples of conjugation in synopsis, p.
520.
conjugation-classes, on what founded, 601; their characters, 602–10.
conjugations, first or non-a and second or a-conjugation, 601–8, 733; transfers from the
former to the latter, 625 a, 631 a, 665 a, 670–4, 694 a, 716, 731, 896.
conjunctions, 1131–3.
consonants, pronunciation etc., 31–75: mutes, 32–50; semivowels, 51–8; spirants, 59–66;
visarga and anusvāra etc., 67–73; quantity, 76; cons. allowed as finals, 122, 139–52; occurring
at end of stems and endings, 139 a: — and see the different classes and letters.
consonant-groups, how written in devanāgarī, 9, 12–5; their extension and abbreviation, 121,
227–33.
consonantal stems, declension of, 377–465; their classification, 382.
contemptuous prefix, 506, 1121 e; do. suffix, 521, 1222 d.
copulative compounds, 1247 a–c, 1252–61; of nouns, 1253–6; adjectives, 1257; adverbs,
1259; numerals, 1261; copulatives in later language, 1253, 1254; in Rig-Veda, 1255; in Atharva-
Veda, 1256; accent, 1258; possessives from copulatives, 1293 b.
cur-class of verbs, 607, 775, 1041 b, 1056; — and see causative conjugation.
dative case, uses of, 285–8; dat. infinitive, 982, 986; dat. used adverbially, 1113; dat. by
attraction with infin., 982 a; dat. as prior member of compound, 1250 c.
deaspiration of aspirate mutes, 114, 153–5; consequent re-aspiration of initial, 141 a, 147,
155.
declension, in general, 261–320; gender, 263; number, 264, 265; case, 266; uses of the
cases, 267–305; endings of decl., 306–10; variation of stem and insertions, 311–3; accent, 814–
20; decl. of nouns and adjectives, 321–465; classification, 321 b, c; I. a-stems, 326–34; II. i-and
u-stems, 335–46; III. ā- , ī-, and ū (and diphthongal) stems. 347–68; IV. ṛ-stems, 369–76; V.
consonant-stems, 377–465: A. root-stems etc., 383–410; B. derivative stems in as, is, us, 411–9;
C. in an, 420–37; D. in in, 438–41; E. in ant, 442–57; F. in vāṅs, 458–62; G. in yas, 463–5; —
decl. of numerals, 482–5; of pronouns, 491–521; of adjectives inflected pronominally, 522–6.
declinable stems, composition of, with verbs, 1090–5; derivation of — see derivation.
decompound compounds and their analysis, 1248.
decrement and increment of elements, 123, 234 ff.
demonstrative pronouns, 495–603.
denominative conjugation, 540 a, 1053–68; formation without sign, 1054; with sign ya, from

stems of various final, 1055–64; their occurrence, 1057; meaning, 1058; relation of aya- and
āya-stems, 1059 c; relation to causative. 1041 c, 1056, 1067; with signs sya, kāmya, āpaya,
1064, 1065; with āya, beside nā-class verbs etc., 732, 1066; from other stems, 1066 a, c;
inflection, 1068; declinable stems from denom. stem, 1068 b, 1149 d, 1178 h, i, 1180 d.
dental series of mutes (t, th, d, dh, n ), pronunciation etc., 33, 47, 48; peculiar quality of
Skt. dentals, 47 a; dent. character of ḷ, 25; of l, 51, 53; of s, 60; assimilation of dent. to
palatals and linguals, 118, 196–203, 205; dent, sibilant and nasal converted to lingual, 180–95;
anomalous conversions to guttural and lingual, 151 a, b; of guttural, palatal, and labial to
dental, 151 c, e; — and see the different letters.
dependent clause, accent of verb in, 595.
dependent compounds, 1247 d–f, 1263, 1264–78; noun, 1264; adjective, 1265; their varieties,
1266–78; with ordinary noun or adjective as final member, 1267, 1268; with root-stem, 1269;
derivative in a, 1270; ana, 1271; ya, 1272; participle in ta or na, 1273; ti,

1274; in, 1275; i, 1276; van, man, etc., 1277, 1278; dep. comp. in possessive use, 1296.
derivation of adverbs, 1097–1109; of declinable stems, 1136–1245: in general, 1136–42;
primary, 1143–1201; secondary, 1202–45.
derivative or secondary conjugation — see secondary.
descent, adjectives and nouns indicating, 1206 a.
descriptive compounds, 1247 d–f, 1263, 1279–91; of ordinary adjective with noun, 1280; of
appositional noun with noun, 1280 d; with participle as final member, 1283, 1284; with
gerundive, 1285; with root-stem, 1286; with other verbal derivatives, 1287; with inseparable
prefix as prior member, 1288; with verbal prefix etc., 1289; with other adverbial words, 1290;
special cases, 1291; descr. comp. in possessive use, 1297 ff.
desiderative conjugation, 540, 1026–40; meaning, 1026, 1040; used in future sense, 1040 a;
formation of stem, 1027–9; abbreviated stems, 1030; use of union-vowel i, 1031; inflection,
present-system, 1032; other forms, 1033–6; derivative or tertiary conjugations from desid. stem,
1039; desid. from causative stem, 1052 c; declinable stems from desid. stem, 1035, 1036, 1140
b, 1149 d, 1159 b, 1161 d, 1178 g; desid. root-stems, 392 d; future in desid. sense, 949; desid.
in future sense, 1040 a.
determinative compounds, 1247 d–f, 1202–91; dependent, 1264–78; descriptive, 1279–91; in
possessive adjective use, 1293 ff.
devatā-dvandva compounds, 1251 a, 1255.
diminutives, secondary derivation of, 1206 b, 1222 d, 1243.
diphthongs (e, āi, o, āu), mode of writing with consonants, 10 g, h; pronunciation etc., 27
30; protraction of, 78 c; euphonic combination as finals, 131–5: — and see the different letters.
diphthongal stems, declension of, 360, 361.
div- or dīv-class of verbs — see ya-class.
double stems, present, 815: aorist 894 d, 897 b.
doubling of aspirate mutes, 154; of a final nasal, 210; of ch, 227; of first consonant of a
group, 229; of a consonant after r (and h, l, v), 228.
dual number, its use, 265; its forms in declension, 308; in personal pronoun, 492 b.
dual finals e, ī, ū uncombinable, 138 a, g.
dvandva compounds — see copulative.
dvigu compounds, 1312.
eighth class of verbs — see u-class.

elision of initial a, 135; how marked, 16; its infrequency in Veda, 135 c; elision of initial ā,
136 d; of final a or ā, 137 b.
emphasis, accent of verb for, 598.
emphatic pronoun, 513.
enclitic or dependent circumflex, 85, 86.
endings, of inflection and derivation, 98–100; of declension, 306–10; of singular, 307; dual,
308; plural, 309; normal scheme, 310; end. of a-stems, 327–9 ; of i-and u-stems, 336–8; of
radical ā-, ī-, ū-stems, 349; of derivative do., 363; of ṛ-stems, 371; of personal pronouns, 492,
493; of general pronominal declension, 496; — end. of conjugation, 523, 541–69; of 1st sing.,
543; 2d, 544; 3d, 545; of 1st du., 546; 2d and 3d, 547; of 1st pl., 548; 2d, 549; 3d, 550; normal
schemes, 553; accent, 552–4; end. of 2d and 3d sing taking the place of root-final, 555 a;
union-vowels, 555 b, c; end. of subjunctive combined with mode-sign, 560–2; of optative, 566; of
precative, 568; tāt of imperative, 570; — end. of derivation — see suffixes.
euphonic combination of elements, 100, 101; rules respecting it, 109–226.
exclamatory pronoun, 507; exclam. prefix from interrogative pronoun, 506, 1121 e.
extension of cons.-groups, 227–30.
external and internal combination, distinction of, 109–12; cases of

external comb. in declension, 111 a, b; in derivation, 111 c, d, 1203 e.
feminine stems: to ā-stems, 332, 334 b; to i- and u-stems, 344–6; to ṛ-stems, 376 a; to cons.-
stems, 378 a, 401 c, 435, 436, 449, 452 b, 459, 463 d; fem. in ī from ya-stems, 1210 c; fem.
stems in composition, 1250 h.
fifth class of verbs — see nu-class.
finals, permitted, 122, 139–52; most usual, 149; only one final consonant allowed, 150;
exceptions, 150 b, c; anomalous changes of final mutes, 151; final consonants of stems and
endings, 139 a.
final clauses, modes used in, 581 c, d.
first class of verbs — see a-class.
first or non-a-conjugation of verbs, its characteristics, 604.
forms, stronger and weaker, of roots and stems, 104 e, 105, 106; — and see variation of
stem.
fourth class of verbs — see ya-class.
fractional use of ordinals, 488.
frequentative conjugation — see intensive.
future passive participles — see gerundives.
future tenses, 532; their uses, 948, 949; fut. systems, 535, 931–50; s-fature and conditional,
932–41; periphrastic future, 942–7; future use of pres., 777; of desid., 1040 a; desid. use of fut.,
948 b; fut. participial phrases, 1075 d.
gender in declension, 262, 263.
general and special tenses, 599 a.
genitive case, uses of, 294–300; with adj., 296; with verb, 297, 298; with prepositions, 299
a, 1130; with adverbs, 299 b; gen. absolute, 300 b; loss of accent of gen. with vocative, 314 d,
e; gen. infinitive, 984; gen. used adverbially, 300 a, 1115; as prior member of compound, 1250
e.
gerunds, 539, 989–95; their uses, 989, 994; ger. in tvā, 990, 991, 993; in ya or tya, 990,
992, 993; in tvāya and tvī, 993 b; in tvānam and tvīnam, 993 c; adverbial gerund in am, 995.
gerundives, or future passive participles, 961–6, 1212 i, 1213, 1216–8; ger. in ya, 962–3,
1213, in tavya, 962, 964, 1212 i; in anīya, 962, 965, 1215 b; in tva, 966 a, 1209 h; in enya,
966 b, 1217; in āyya, 966 c, 1218; in elima, 966 d, 1201 a; ger. in composition, 1285.
grave (anudātta) accent, 81.

guṇa-strengthening, character and occurrence of, 27, 235–43, and passim; in primary
derivation, 1143 a; in secondary, 1203 a, 1204 g.
guttural series of mutes (k, kh, g, gh, n̄ ), pronunciation etc., 33, 39–41, 180 a; asserted
gutt. character of a, 20 a; of h, 65 a; palatals from original gutt., 41–3; ç and h do., 64, 66;
reversion of palatals etc. to gutt. form, 43, 64, 142, 145, 147, 214–26: — and see the different
letters.
heavy and light syllables, 79.
hiatus, avoidance of, 113, 125–38; not avoided in Veda, 113 b, 125 c, 129 e; its occurrence
as result of euphonic processes, 132–4, 175 b, d, 177.
hu-class of verbs — see reduplicating class.
imperative mode, 533, 569, 572, 575, 578; scheme of its endings, 553 d; its 1st persons old
subjunctive, 533, 574, 578; impv. form in tāt and its uses, 570, 571; with mā prohibitive, 579 c;
Vedic 2d sing. in si, 624; impv. use of infinitives, 982 d.
imperfect, tense, 532, 599; its use, 779.
imperfect time, no real designation of, 532 a.
increment and decrement of elements 123, 234 ff.
indeclinables, 98 a, 1096–1135; adverbs, 1097–1122; prepositions, 1123–30; conjunctions,
1131–3; interjections, 1134, 1135; derivative stems from indeclinables, 1202 b, 1245;
compounds with indecl. as final member, 1314 a, f.
indefinite pronouns, 513 c; indef. use of interrogative and relative pronouns, 507, 511.

infinitives, 538, 968–88; later, 968, 987; earlier, 969–79; uses, 980–8; relation to ordinary verbal
nouns, 969, 970 l.
inseparable prefixes, 1121; in descriptive composition, 1283 ff., 1288; in possessive, 1304.
insertions between stem and ending in declension, 313.
instrumental case, uses of, 278–84; of separation, 283 a; with prepositions, 284, 1127;
gerundial, 989; used adverbially, 1112; as prior member of compound, 1250 b.
intensive (or frequentative) conjugation, 540, 1000–25; character and occurrence, 1000,
1001; reduplication, 1002, 1003; inflection, present-system, 1004–17; derivative middle
inflection, 1016, 1017; forms outside present-system, 1018, 1019, 1026; doubtful intens.
formations, 1020–4; derivative or tertiary conjugations from intens. stem, 1025.
interjections, 1134, 1135; their final vowel uncombinable. 138 f.
internal and external combination, distinction of, 109–12.
internal change, question of derivation by, 1208 i.
interrogative particles, 1122 f.
interrogative pronoun, 504–7; its indefinite use, 507; exclamatory prefix from it, 506, 1121 j.
inverted compounds, 1291 c, 1314 d.
iṣ-aorist, 824, 898–910: formation of stem, 898–900; inflection, 901, 902; roots making it,
903; irregularities, 904; modes, 905–8; from secondary conjugations, 1019, 1035, 1048, 1068 a.
jihvāmūlīya-spirant, 69, 170 d.
karmadhāraya compounds — see descriptive compounds.
krī-class of verbs — see nā-class.
labial series of mutes (p, ph, b, bh, m ), pronunciation etc., 33, 49, 50; lab. character of u, ū,
20; of v, 51, 57, 68; anomalous conversion of labial to guttural, 151 d; to dental, 151 e: — and
see the different letters.
lengthening of vowels in formation and inflection, 244–6; of final vowel in composition, 247,
1087 b; in the sentence in Veda, 248.
light and heavy syllables, 79.
lightening of a or ā to an i- or u-vowel, 249 ff.
lingual series of mutes (ṭ, ṭh, ḍ, ḍh, ṇ), pronunciation etc., 33, 45, 46; non-originality and
ordinary derivation, 46; ling. character of ṛ, 25; of r, 51, 52; ling. l, 5 a, 54; ling, character of

ṣ, 61; assimilation of dentals to ling., 118, 196 ff.; lingualization of s and n, 180–95: — and see
the different letters.
locative case, uses of, 301–5; loc. absolute, 303 b–d; of goal of motion or action, 301 e. 304;
with prepositions, 305, 1126; used adverbially, 303 e, 1116; loc. infinitive, 985; loc. use of
adverbs in tra, 1099; in ha, 1100 a; in dā, 1103 b; loc. as prior member of compound, 1250 d.
long and short quantity, 76–9.
manner, particles of, 1101, 1102, 1107, 1122 k.
manuscripts, native Sanskrit, mode of writing in, 9 a, b.
middle stem-form in declension, 311.
middle voice, 528–30; its use as passive, 531, 998 c, d.
mode in verbal inflection, 533; subjunctive, 557–63; optative, 564–8; imperative, 569–71;
uses of the modes, 572–82.
multiplicative numeral adverbs, 489 a, 1104–6.
mutes, series of, their pronunciation etc., 32–50: classification, 32–8; guttural series, 39–41;
palatal, 42–4; lingual, 45, 46; dental, 47, 48; labial, 49, 50; assimilation, 117 a, b; mutes
permitted as finals, 141–3; anomalous conversions from one series to another, 151: — and see
the different series.
nā-class (ninth, krī-class) of verbs, 603, 717–32: formation of stem, 717; inflection, 718–26: roots
of the class, 727; irregularities, 728–32; accompanying denominative in āya, 732, 1066 b.

nasal assimilation, 117 c, f, g, 161, 198 b, 199 c.
nasal class (seventh, rudh-class) of verbs, 603, 683–96: formation of stem, 683; inflection,
684–92; roots of the class, 694; irregularities, 693–6.
nasal increment in strong forms, 255, 386.
nasal mutes (n̄, ñ, ṇ, n, m ), 34. 36; their occurence as finals, 143; duplication, 210;
assimilation of preceding mute, 161, 198 b, 199 b; abbreviation of consonant-group after, 231;
— nasal spirant or anusvāra, 70–3; — nasal semivowels, 71 c, 206, 213 c; — nasal vowels, 71,
72: — and see the different letters.
nasality, Hindu definition of, 36 a.
negative particles, 1122 c–e; neg. prefix, 1121 a–c.
neutral pron. of a, 21.
ninth class of verbs — see nā-class.
nominative case, uses of, 267, 268; peculiar construction with verbs, 268 a; with iti, 268 b;
with vocative, 268 c; used adverbially, 1117; nom. use of infinitive, 987; nom. form as particle,
1117; in composition, 1250 f.
noun and adjective, distinction of, 322; inflection of nouns — see declension.
nu-class (fifth, su-class) of verbs, 603, 697–716: formation of stem, 697; inflection, 698–707;
roots of the class, 708; irregularities, 710v3, 716.
number in declension, 264, 265; in conjugation, 636; number-forms in composition, 1250 g.
numerals, 475–89; simple cardinals, 475; their combinations for odd numbers, 476–81;
inflection, 482–5; construction, 486; ordinals, 487, 488; other num. derivatives, 489, 1104–6,
1246; num. figures, 17; possessive compounds with num., 1300; num. or dvigu compounds,
1312.
omission, sign indicating, 16.
onomatopoetic words, 1091, 1135 b.
optative mode, 533, 564–8; its formation, 564, 565; scheme of endings combined with mode-
sign, 566; precative, 567, 921–6; scheme of prec. endings, 568; uses of opt. , 67382; with mā
prohibitive, 579 b; optative use of auginentless preterit forms, 587.
order of subjects in the grammar, 107; as best taken up by a student, 108, 112; of subjects
in euph. combination, 124.
ordinal numeral adjectives, 487, 488.
pada-endings in declension, 111 a.

palatal series of mutes (c, ch, j, jh, ñ ), pronunciation etc., 33, 42–4; derived from original
gutturals, 42; reversion to guttural form, 43, 214 ff.; euphonic combinations, 118, 119, 214–20;
treatment as finals, 142; assimilation of dentals to, 196–203; pal. character of i, ī, 20; of y, 51,
56; of ç, 63, 64; palatal for guttural in reduplication, 590 b: — and see the different letters.
participial compounds, 1247 g, 1309.
participles, 534, 537, 583, 584, 1172–7; of present-systems, 619 etc. etc.; of perfect, 802–7;
of aorist, 840, 852, 872, 897, 909; of future, 939; passive part., 952–8, 1176, 1177; active, in
tavant, navant, 959, 960; future passive, 961–6; of secondary conjugations, 1012, 1013, 1019,
1037, 1043 e, f, 1051, 1068; part. in possessive composition, 1299; — inflection of part. in ant,
443–9; in vāṅs, 458–62; part. phrases, periphrastic, 1074, 1076; — relation of part. and
adjective, 967.
particles, 98 a; prolongation of final vowel of, 248 a; part, giving accent to verb, 595 c, e,
598 a.
passive conjugation, 531, 540, 998; present-system ( yá-class), 606, 768–74; aorist 3d sing.,
842–5, 1048; periphrastic perfect, 1072; participle in ta or na, 952–8, 1051 b, 1176, 1177;
future participles, 961–6 (and see gerundives); pass. use of infinitive, 988; pass. from
intransitives, 999 a; pass, of secondary conjugations, 1025, 1039, 1052 a; pass. constructions,
282 a, 999.
past use of present tense. 777, 778.
perfect tense, 532; scheme of its

endings, 553 c; uses, 821–3; — perf.-system, 535, 780–823: for- mation of stem, 781–94;
reduplication, 782–91; strong and weak stem-forms, 792–4; endings and their combination with
stem, 795–9; union-vowel i, 796–8; inflection, 800; irregularities, 801; participle, 802–7; its
inflection, 458–62; modes, 808–16; pluperfect, 817–20; — periphrastic perf., 1070–73.
perfect time, expressed by so-called aorist, 532 a, 825, 928; by perfect, 822, 823; by
participial phrases, 1075 d.
periphrastic conjugation, 540 a, 1069–75; periph. future, 532, 931, 942–7; its uses, 949;
perfect, 1070–3, 1018, 1034, 1045; aorist and precative, 1073 b; present, 1073 c; periph.
participial phrases, 1074, 1075.
person in verbal inflection, 536.
personal endings — see endings of conjugation. personal pronouns, 491–4; nouns used as
such, 514.
phrases, derivatives from, 1202 b; compounds from, 1314 b.
place, particles of, 1099, 1100, 1122 i.
pluperfect tense, 532, 817–20; plup. time, no designation of, 532 a; save by participial
phrases, 1075 d.
position, length of syllable by, 79.
possessive adjectives, 1106 a, 1229 b, 1230–35; pronominal, 516.
possessive compounds, 324, 1247 g, 1293–1308; poss. dependents, 1296; poss. descriptives,
1297 ff.: with ordinary adjective as prior member, 1298; with participle, 1299; with numeral,
1300; with appositive noun, 1301–3; with adverb, 1304–6; added suffixes, 1212 c, 1307;
pregnant use, 1308.
precative optative, 533 b; its formation, 567; scheme of endings, 568; prec. in later
language, 921–5; use, 673 c.
propositions, 1123–30; words used as such, 1123–5; cases construed with them, 1126–30;
gerunds used as, 994 g; — prep, in composition with roots — see verbal prefixes.
prepositional compounds, 1247 g, 1310; with added suffix, 1212 m.
present tense, 532; its uses, 777, 778; — pres.-system, 535, 599–779: prominence as part of
verb-system, 600; varieties of form and their classification, 601–9; various from same root, 609;
conjugations and conjugation-classes, 602–10; first or non-a-conjugation: I. root-class, 611–41; II.
reduplicating class, 642–82; III. nasal class, 683–96; IV. nu- and u-class, 697–716; V. nā-class,
717–32; second or a-conjugation, 733: VI. a-class, 734–50; VII. accented á-class, 751–8; VIII. ya-
class, 759–67; IX. yá-class, or passive conjugation, 768–74; so-called cur- or tenth class, 775;
uses of tenses, 776–9; of modes, 572–81; pres. stems, derivatives from, 1140 c.
present use of perfect, 821 c, 823; of aorist, 930.

presumption or conjecture, future of, 948.
primary and secondary personal endings, 542 ff.; confusion of them in use, 636 d, 933 a,
938; normal schemes, 553.
primary derivation, 1138–1201: relation to secondary, 1139; from what made, 1140, 1141;
union-vowels, 1142; form of root, 1143; accent, 1144; meaning, 1145, 1146; prim. suffixes and
the derivatives made with them, 1148–1201.
prohibitive expression, 574, 579, 580.
pronominal roots, 490; their character, in inflection and derivation, 1137 b, 1138; adverbs
from them, 1097 ff.
pronouns, 490–521: personal, 491–4; demonstrative, 495–503; interrogative, 504–7; relative,
508–12; emphatic, indefinite, 513; nouns used pronominally, 514; pron. derivative adjectives,
515–21; adjectives declined pronominally, 522–6.
pronunciation — see system of sounds.
protracted (pluta) quantity, 78; protr. final vowel uncombinable, 138 e.
punctuation, signs of, in devanāgarī, 16 d.

quantity of consonants and vowels, 768; of syllables, 79.
r-endings of 3d pl., 550 d.
radical stems — see root-stems.
reduplicated (or causative) aorist, 824, 856–73, 1046, 1047; formation of stem, 857–63;
inflection, 864–7; use in primary conjugation, 868; in causative, 1046, 1047; modes, 869–71.
reduplicating class (third, hu-class) of verbs, 603, 642–82; reduplication and accent, 642–6;
inflection, 647–57; roots of the class, 659; irregularities, 658, 660–82.
reduplication, occurrence of, 259; general rules for forming, 588–90; present red., 643, 660
ff.; perfect, 782–91; aorist, 857–63; intensive, 1002; desiderative, 1029; in derivation, 1143 e;
anomalous, 1087 f.
relationship, nouns of, in ṛ, 369 ff., 1182 f.
relative clauses, peculiarities of, 512; modes used in, 581 a; accent of verb in, 595.
relative compounds, improper name for possessive, 1293 d.
relative pronoun, 508–12.
repeated words, 1260.
resolution, in Veda, of semivowels into vowels, and of vowels into two syllables, 55 a, 58 a,
84 c, 113 b, 125 c, 129 e, 309 f, 353 a, 470 b, 566 c, 761 g, 771 g.
reversion, so-called, of palatal mutes and sibilant, and of h, to guttural form, 43, 64, 66,
119, 142, 145, 147, 214 ff., 681, 787, 1028 f, 1176 a.
roots, 98–100; roots of the Skt. language, 102–5; roots and root-forms acc. to the native
grammarians, 103, 104.
root-aorist, 824, 829–45: in later language, 829; in older, 830 ff.; modes, 836–9; participles,
840; passive aor. 3d sing., 842–6.
root-class (second, ad-class) of verbs, 603, 611–41; inflection, 612–23; roots of the class, 626;
irregularities, 624, 626–41.
root-stems, their occurrence and use, 323, 383, 1137, 1147; as infinitives, 970 a, 971; in
dependent composition, 1269; in descriptive, 1286; inflection of such stems in ā, ī, ū, 349–361;
in consonants, 383–410; sometimes govern accus., 271 d; neut. pl. forms, 379 b.
rudh-class of verbs — see nasal class.
s-aorist, 824, 878–97: formation of stem, 878, 879; endings and combination with stem, 880,
881; question of loss of s in certain forms, 834, 881; inflection, 882; irregularities, 884–91;
absence of ī in 2d and 3d sing. in older language, 888–90; modes, 892–6; participles, 897; — s-
aor. stem in derivation, 1140 c.

s-future, 931–9: formation of stem, 932, 936; use of union-vowel i, 934, 935; occurrence,
937; modes, 938; participles, 939; its preterit, the conditional, 940, 941; uses, 948.
sa-aorist, 824, 916–20: roots allowed later to make it, 916; occurrence in older language,
919, 920; inflection, 917, 918.
second class of verbs — see root-class.
second or a-conjugation of verbs, its characteristics, 605, 733.
secondary adjective compounds, 1247 g, 1292–1310.
secondary conjugations, 640, 996–1068: passive, 998, 999; intensive, 1000–1025; desiderative
1026–40; causative, 1041–52; denominative, 1063–68; tertiary, or derivative from secondary,
1025, 1039, 1052.
secondary derivation, 1138, 1139, 1202–45; relation to primary, 1139; union-vowels, 1142;
forms of stem, 1203, 1204; accent, 1205; meaning, 1206; sec. suffixes and the derivatives made
with them, 1207–45; external combination in sec. derivation, 111 c, d, 1203 e.
secondary personal endings, 542 ff.; normal scheme, 553 b.
semivowels (y, r, l, v ), pronunciation etc., 51–8; nasal semiv., 71 c, f, 206, 213 d; semiv.
assimilation, 117 d–f: — and see the different letters.
sentence, rules of euphonic combination in, 101; their probable artificiality, 101 a.
series or classes of mutes, 32 ff.

seventh class of verbs — see nasal class.
sh-sounds (ṣ and ç), 61, 63.
short and long quantity, 76–9.
sibilants (ç, ṣ, s), pronunciation etc., 60–4: — and see the different letters.
sibilant or sigmatic aorist, 824, 874–920: formation and classification, 874–7; 4. s-aorist,
878–97; 5. iṣ-aorist, 898–910; 6. siṣ-aorist, 911–5; 7. sa-aorist, 916–20; its stem in derivation,
1140 c.
simple aorist, 824, 828–55: 1. root-aorist, 829–41; passive aor. 3d sing., 842–5; 2. a-aorist,
846–55.
siṣ-aorist, 824, 911–5: formation of stem, and inflection, 911; forms in older language, 912,
913; modes, 914; middle forms, 915.
sixth class of verbs — see á-class.
sonant and surd sounds, 34, 35; Hindu definition of their difference, 34 b; mutes, 34, 35;
aspirates, 37, 38; question as to character of h, 65 a; of final mute, 141 b; euphonic
assimilation of the two classes, 117, 156–78.
special and general tenses, 599 a.
spirants, 59 ff.: sibilants, 59–64; aspiration, 65; other breathings, 67–9.
stems, inflectible, 98–100, 106; their derivation — see derivation.
strengthening and weakening processes, 234–60.
strong and weak, or strong, middle, and weakest, forms of stems in declension, 311; of
roots and stems in general, 104–6; confusions of strong and weak forms in decl., 462 c; in
conj., 556 a; strong forms in 2d sing., 723; in 2d du., 704, 831 a, 839, 1007 b; in 3d du., 793
h, 839; in 1st pl., 621 b, 658, 676 a, 793 h, 831 a, 832; in 2d pl., 618, 621 b, 654, 658, 669,
690, 704, 707, 723, 831 a, 839; in 3d pl., 793 h, 831 a.
su-class of verbs — see nu-class.
subjunctive mode, 533; formation and endings, 557–62; its first persons used later as
imperative, 533, 574, 578; subj. use of augmeutless preterit forms, 563, 587; uses of subj.
mode, 574–82.
suffixes, 98–100; forming adverbs, 1097–1109; do. declinable stems — see derivation.
superlative — see comparison.
surd and sonant sounds — see sonant.
syllables, quantity of, 79; distinguished as heavy and light, 79.
system of sounds, 19–75: vowels and diphthongs, 19–30; consonants, 31 ff.; mutes, 32–50;

semivowels, 51–8; sibilants, 59–64; aspiration, 65, 66; visarga and other breathings, 68, 69;
anusvāra, 703; unwritten sounds defined by Hindu grammarians, 74, 230; scheme of spoken
alphabet, with notice of comparative frequency of the sounds, 75; quantity, 76–9; accent and its
designation, 80–97.
tan-class of verbs — see u-class.
tatpuruṣa-compounds — see determinatives.
tense in verbal inflection, 532; tense-systems, 535; present-system, 599–779; perfect-system,
780–823; aorist-systems, 824–930; future- systems, 931–950.
tenth class of verbs — see causative conjugation, and cur-class.
tertiary, or derivative from secondary, conjugations, 1025, 1039, 1052, 1068 a.
third class of verbs — see reduplicating class.
time, particles of, 1103, 1122 j.
transliteration, general method of, 5; of sign of elision, 135 b; of combined final and initial
vowels, 126 a; of anusvāra, 73 c; of accent, 83 a, 89.
tud-class of verbs — see á-class.
u-class (eighth, tan-class) of verbs, 603, 697–716; formation of stem, 697; inflection, 698–707;
roots of the class, 709; irregular root kṛ or kar, 714, 715; other irregularities, 716.
uncombinable (pragṛhya) final vowels, 138.
uninflected words — see indeclinables.
union-vowels, 254, 555 b, c; i in present inflection, 630, 631, 640; in perfect, 796–8, 803; in
aorist,

876 b, 877; in s-future, 934, 935; in periphrastic future, 943; in desiderative, 1031; in passive
participle, 956; in infinitive and gerund, 968, 991; in derivation, 1142; — ī in present inflection,
631–4; in 2d and 3d sing., 555 b; in intensive, 1004 ff.; ī for i, 900 b; āi for ī, 555 c.
upadhmāniya-spirant, 69, 170 d.
variable or changeable ṛ of roots, 242; treatment of, 245 b; in passive, 770 c; in s-aor., 885; in
iṣ-aor., 900 b; in prec., 922 a; in s-fut., 935 a; in pple, 955 d, 957 b; in infln., 968 d; in tvā-
gerund, 991 b; in ya-gerund, 992 a; in desid., 1028 b.
variation of stem-form in declension, 311, 312; in ṛ-stems, 370 b; in consonantal stems, 379,
385–8, 421, 443, 444, 458, 463; — in conjugation, 556; in present-stem, 604; in perfect. 792–4;
in aorist, 831 ff., 879, 899; in intensive, 1004; in primary derivation, 1143; in secondary, 1203,
1204; in composition, 1249 b, c.
verb — see conjugation.
verb-forms, accentuation of, in the sentence, 92 b, 591–8; prolongation of final a or i of, 248
c, d; comparison of, 473 c, 474; comb. with insep. prefixes, 1121 b, g, i.
verbal prefixes, 1076, 1077; kindred words, 1078, 1079, 1120; composition with roots, 1076–
87, 137; euph. effect on root, 185, 192, 1086; accent, 1082–5; their more independent use,
1084, 1118; prepositional uses, 1125; forms of comparison, 473 b, 1119; declinable stems from
roots compounded with them, 1141, 1282; use in descriptive composition, 1281, 1289; in
possessive, 1305; in prepositional, 1310.
visarga (or visarjanīya), 67–9; quantitative value, 79; occurrence, 144, 145, 170–2; alphabetic
order, 7 a, 172 a: — and see ḥ.
vocative case, form of, 266 a, 307 k; Vedic, in as, 425 g, 454 b, 462 a, 465 a; accent (along
with qualifying word), 92 a, 314; verb accented after, 594 a.
voice in verbal inflection, 528–31.
vowels, how written in devanāgarī with consonants, 10; sign of absence of, 11; their
pronunciation etc., 19–29: a-, i-, u-vowels, 19–22; ṛ-, ḷ-vowels, 23–6; diphthongs, 27–9; quantity,
77, 78; accent, 80 ff.; nasal vowels, 71; rules of vowel-combination, 125–38; resulting accent,
128, 130, 135 a; exceptional cases, 136–8.
vṛddhi-strengthening, character and occurrence of, 27, 235–43, and passim; in primary
derivation, 1143 a; in secondary, 1204.
w-sound, belonging to v, 57.
weak, or weakest, form of stem in declension, 311.
weakening and strengthening processes, 234–60.

writing in India, 2 a; mode of, in Skt. manuscripts, 9 a, b; its modifications in western
practice, 9 c–e.
ya-class (fourth, div-class) of verbs, 606, 759–67: formation of stem, 759; inflection, 760; roots of
the class and their classification, 761, 762; irregularities, 763–7.
yá-class of verbs, or passive present-system, 606, 768–74; formation of stem, 768–70;
inflection, 771; irregularities, 772–4; yá-formation from intensive stem, 1016, 1017.

ERRATA.
A few entirely obvious misprints are passed without notice.
p.
5,
10 c,
last
l.
— for क
read
की
42, 125 b,
l. 3
— for (for prayuga)
"
(for prayuga?).
67, 199 c,
l. 3
— for IB.
"
JB.
92, 276 a,
l. 2
— for ledgues
"
leagues.
94, 281 b,
l. 4
— read ‘kṣahṛdayaṁ dātā rājā ’çvahṛ-.
99, 296 b,
l. 10 — for deceivlng
read
deceiving.
297 b,
l. 5
— " mpart
"
impart.
100,
l. 2
— " preceive
"
perceive.
112,324,
l. 4
— " prajā́kāmá
"
prajākāma.
128,margin
— " 356–]
"
354–].
131,361 e,
l. 6
— " 314
"
314 b.
f,
l. 4
— " bor hugú (f. -gū́, JB.)
"
bahugú (f. gū́, TB.).
144,
383 k.
1,
l. 3
— " n
"
in
147,391 f,
l. 1
— " milki
"
-milking.
148,391 g,
l. 2
— " çā́mam
"
-çā́mam.
169,458,
l. 5
— " i
"
is.
195,509,
l. 8
(accus. sing. masc.) for yām
"
yám.
209,555 a,
last
l.
— for urther
"
further.
213,568,
l. 7
— " īḍhvam
"
īḍhvám.
261,718,
l. 7
(3d. pl. mid.) for ीणाते
"
ीणते
263,731,
l. 3
— for √mi
"
√mī.
264,733 a,
l. 4
— for -systems
"
-stems.
281,785 a,
l. 2
— " dyu
"
dyut.
355,990 a,
l. 9
— " E.
"
S.
357,992 c,
l. 2
— " gúhya
"
guhya.
379,1042 b, l. 11 —
read No forms made without strengthening have a causative value in the older
language.
383,1045,
l. 6
— for च
read
चे.
396,1077,
l. 10 — " abhi
"
abhí.
397,1079,
l. 6
— read the sound hin̄g, low, murmur.
399,1084 a, l. 4
— for ā́rūhat
read
ā́ruhat.
431,1155 e, l. 3
— " -amri
"
-mamri.
467,1222 c, l. 7
— " 516 d
"
516 b.
472,1230 g, l. 3
— " ike
"
like.
477,1238 b, l. 2
— " cases-forms
"
case-forms.
500,1288 g, l. 1
— " sa
"
sa.

511,1308 a, l. 1
— " ukhānṛtam
"
uktānṛtam.
